Welfare and Spending Effects
of Consumption Stimulus Policies
2025-07-20

Christopher D. Carroll1
Edmund Crawley2
William Du3
Ivan Frankovic4
Håkon Tretvoll5
Using a heterogeneous agent model calibrated to match measured spending dynamics
over four years following an income shock (Fagereng, Holm, and Natvik (2021)), we
assess the effectiveness of three fiscal stimulus policies employed during recent recessions.
Unemployment insurance (UI) extensions are the clear “bang for the buck” winner when
effectiveness is measured in utility terms. Stimulus checks are second best and have
two advantages (over UI): they arrive faster, and they are scalable to any desired size.
A temporary (two-year) cut in the rate of wage taxation is considerably less effective
than the other policies and has negligible effects in the version of our model without a
multiplier.
html:
PDF:
Slides:
GitHub:

https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/
HAFiscal.pdf
https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/HAFiscal-Slides.pdf
https://github.com/llorracc/HAFiscal

Forthcoming, Quantitative Economics

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Eurosystem, or Statistics Norway. This project has received funding from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement No. 851891) and from the Research Council of Norway (grant No. 326419).
The authors would like to thank seminar participants at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Deutsche
Bundesbank, the European Central Bank, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Oslo Macro Group, the
Society for Computational Economics in 2023 and 2024, Statistics Norway, the University of Pennsylvania, Vanderbilt
University, and West Virginia University for valuable feedback. The authors would also like to thank Sasha Indarte,
Adrian Monninger, Plutarchos Sakellaris, three anonymous referess, and the editor Morten Ravn for insightful comments
on earlier versions of the paper.
1 Carroll: Department of Economics, Johns Hopkins University, ccarroll@jhu.edu, and NBER

.

2 Crawley: Federal Reserve Board, edmund.s.crawley@frb.gov
3 Du: Johns Hopkins University, wdu9@jhu.edu
4 Frankovic: Deutsche Bundesbank, ivan.frankovic@bundesbank.de
5 Tretvoll: Statistics Norway and HOFIMAR at BI Norwegian Business School, Hakon.Tretvoll@ssb.no

