Welfare and Spending Effects
of Consumption Stimulus Policies
2025-01-17

Christopher D. Carroll1
Edmund Crawley2
William Du3
Ivan Frankovic4
Håkon Tretvoll5
Using a heterogeneous agent model calibrated to match measured spending dynamics
over four years following an income shock (?), we assess the effectiveness of three fiscal
stimulus policies employed during recent recessions. Unemployment insurance (UI)
extensions are the clear “bang for the buck” winner when effectiveness is measured in
utility terms. Stimulus checks are second best and have two advantages (over UI): they
arrive faster, and they are scalable to any desired size. A temporary (two-year) cut in
the rate of wage taxation is considerably less effective than the other policies and has
negligible effects in the version of our model without a multiplier.
html:
PDF:
Slides:
GitHub:

https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/
HAFiscal.pdf
https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/HAFiscal-Slides.pdf
https://github.com/llorracc/HAFiscal

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
Federal Reserve Board, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Eurosystem, or Statistics Norway. This project
has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020
research and innovation programme (grant agreement No. 851891).

1 Carroll: Department of Economics, Johns Hopkins University, ccarroll@jhu.edu, and NBER
2 Crawley: Federal Reserve Board, edmund.s.crawley@frb.gov
3 Du: Johns Hopkins University, wdu9@jhu.edu
4 Frankovic: Deutsche Bundesbank, ivan.frankovic@bundesbank.de
5 Tretvoll: Statistics Norway, Hakon.Tretvoll@ssb.no

.

1 Introduction
{sec:intro}

Fiscal policies that aim to boost consumer spending in recessions have been tried in
many countries in recent decades. The nature of such policies has varied widely, perhaps
because traditional macroeconomic models have not provided plausible guidance about
which policies are likely to be most effective—either in reducing misery (a ‘welfare
metric’) or in increasing output (a ‘GDP metric’).
But a new generation of macro models has shown that when microeconomic heterogeneity across consumer circumstances (wealth; income; education) is taken into account,
the consequences of an income shock for consumer spending depend on a measurable
object: the intertemporal marginal propensity to consume (IMPC) introduced in ?.
The IMPC extends the notion of marginal propensity to consume (MPC) to account
for the speed at which households spend. Fortuitously, new sources of microeconomic
data, particularly from Scandinavian national registries, have recently allowed the first
reasonably credible measurements of the IMPC (?).
Even in models that can match a given measured IMPC pattern, the relative merits of
alternative policies depend profoundly on the both the metric (welfare or GDP) and on
the quantitative structure of the rest of the model – for example, whether multipliers exist
and how they work. Here, after constructing a microeconomically credible heterogeneous
agent (HA) model, we examine its implications for how optimal stimulus policies depend
on the existence, nature, and timing of any “multipliers,” which, following ?, we model
in a clean and simple way. As a result, the interaction of the multiplier (if any) with
the other elements of the model is reasonably easy to understand. In order to ease
interpretation of our results, as well as to keep the model tractable, our primary analysis
is based on an aggregation of individual consumption responses. This partial equilibrium
analysis allows us to introduce elements such as the fact that our multiplier only acts
during a recession. However, a general equilibrium approach may introduce transmission
channels that we miss in our primary analysis. Accordingly, we also analyze a simple
HANK and SAM model that embeds our households’ consumption responses in a general
equilibrium framework.1
By “microeconomically credible,” we mean a model that can match three things that
we take to be stylized facts: (1) the measured IMPCs from ?, (2) the cross-sectional
distribution of liquid wealth (following ?’s definition of liquid wealth) and (3) the
spending induced by the unanticipated transitory shock is “front-loaded.” What we
mean by this is that a fairly standard HA model (specifically, the model in ?) can
match both the initial distribution of liquid wealth, and the pattern of spending in
periods after the shock arrives. But the prediction of that model for spending in the
initial period is below the actual spending measured. We call the extra spending that
happens immediately in the period of receipt of the stimulus a “splurge.” This splurge
1

The Econ-ARK toolkit with which the model was solved can construct the Jacobians necessary
to connect a steady-state version of the model to the SSJ Toolkit, permitting a full-fledged NK block.
However, we have chosen a partial equilibrium framework in our in our primary analysis because such
a framework allows for a non-linear multiplier. Furthermore, the HANK and SAM model incorporates
many other confounding and confusing elements that do more to obscure than to illuminate our points.

1

behavior is common across households and independent of their liquid wealth holdings.
As such, it is consistent with the empirical finding that even households with high
liquid wealth have high MPCs in the first quarter.2 The evidence of front-loading from
? is consistent with findings elsewhere in the literature.3 This ‘splurge’ model is also
consistent with evidence, from ?, that spending drops sharply following the large and
predictable drop in income after the exhaustion of unemployment benefits.4
The resulting structural model could be used to evaluate a wide variety of consumption
stimulus policies. We examine three that have been implemented in recent recessions
in the United States (and elsewhere): an extension of unemployment insurance (UI)
benefits, a means-tested stimulus check, and a payroll tax cut.
Our first metric of policy effectiveness is “multiplication bang for the buck”: For a dollar
of spending on a particular policy, how much multiplication is induced? Timing matters
because in our model (following the empirical literature), the size of any “consumption
multiplier” depends on the economic conditions that prevail when the extra spending
occurs. Our strategy to illuminate this point is twofold. First, we calculate the policyinduced spending dynamics in an economy with no multiplier (and, therefore, with
no multiplication-bang-for-the-buck). We then follow ?’s approach to modeling the
aggregate demand externality. In their approach, output depends mechanically on
the level of consumption relative to steady state. But in contrast to ?, the aggregate
demand externality in our model is switched on only when the economy is experiencing
a recession—there is no multiplication for spending that occurs after our simulated
recession is over. A less stark assumption (for example, the degree of multiplication
depends on the distance of the economy from its steady state, or the endogenous timevarying multiplication that arises in a New-Keynesian model) would perhaps be more
realistic but also much harder to assess clearly.
Because our model’s outcomes reflect the behavior of utility-maximizing consumers,
we can calculate another, possibly more interesting, measure of the effectiveness of
alternative policies: their effect on consumers’ welfare. Even without multiplication,
a utility-based metric can justify countercyclical policy because the larger idiosyncratic
shocks to income that occur during a recession may justify a greater-than-normal degree
of social insurance. We call this ‘welfare bang for the buck.’
The principal difference between the two metrics is that what matters for the degree of
spending multiplication is how much of the policy-induced extra spending occurs during
the recession (when the multiplier matters), while effectiveness in the utility metric also
2
As well as ?, ?, ?, and ? among others all provide strong evidence of high MPCs for high-liquidwealth households.
3
See ?; ?; ?.
4
The logic of ? and ? suggests the the utility consequences of such a deviation from perfectly
optimal behavior might not be too large. But such behavior might even be fully rational in a model
in which measured consumption includes spending on ‘small durables’ (including many that may not
be classified as such in the National Accounts, such as memorable goods modeled in ?) that would
generate splurge-like behavior – see ? for a start; see also ?. In addition, ? attributes splurge-like
behavior to a form of “present bias” in which people have time inconsistent preferences; ? offers a
similar interpretation.

2

depends on who is doing the extra spending (because the recession hits some households
much harder than others).
Because high-MPC consumers have high marginal utility, a standard aggregated welfare function would favor redistribution to such consumers even in the absence of a
recession. We are interested in the degree of extra motivation for redistributive policies
present in a recession, so we construct our social welfare metric specifically to measure
only the incremental social welfare effect of alternative policies during recessions (beyond
whatever redistributional logic might apply during expansions – see section ??).
Households do not prepare for our “MIT shock” recessions, which double the unemployment rate and the average length of unemployment spells. The end of the recession occurs
as a Bernoulli process calibrated for an average recession length of six quarters, leading
to a return of the unemployment rate to normal levels over time. When the multiplier
is active, any reduction in aggregate consumption below its steady-state level directly
reduces aggregate productivity and thus labor income. Hence, any policy stimulating
consumption will also boost incomes through this aggregate demand multiplier channel.
Our results are intuitive. In the economy with no recession multiplier, the benefit
of a sustained payroll tax cut is negligible.5 When a multiplier exists, the tax cut has
more benefits, especially if the recession continues long enough that most of the spending
induced by the tax cut happens while the economy is still in recession (and the multiplier
still is in force). The typical recession, however, ends long before our “sustained” wage
tax cut is reversed—and even longer before lower-MPC consumers have spent down most
of their extra after-tax income. Accordingly, even in an economy with a multiplier that
is powerful during recessions, much of the wage tax cut’s effect on consumption occurs
when any multiplier that might have existed in a recession is no longer operative.
Even leaving aside any multiplier effects, the stimulus checks have more value than
the wage tax cut, because at least a portion of such checks go to unemployed people who
have both high MPCs and high marginal utilities (while wage tax cuts, by definition, go
only to persons who are employed and earning wages). The greatest “welfare bang for
the buck” comes from the UI insurance extension, because many of the recipients are in
circumstances in which they have a much higher marginal utility than they would have
had in the absence of the recession, whether or not the multiplier aggregate demand
externality exists.
And, in contrast to the wage-tax cut, both the UI extension and the stimulus checks
concentrate most of the marginal increment to consumption at times when the multiplier
(if it exists) is still powerful. A disadvantage of the UI extension, in terms of “multiplied
bang for the buck,” is that (relative to the assumed-to-be-immediate-upon-recession
5

One reason there is any (welfare) benefit at all, even for people who have not experienced an
unemployment spell, is that the heightened risk of unemployment during a recession increases the
marginal value of current income because it helps them build extra precautionary reserves to buffer
against the extra risk. A second benefit is that, for someone who becomes unemployed some time into the
recession, the temporary tax reduction will have allowed them to accumulate a larger buffer to sustain
them during unemployment. Finally, in a recession, there are more people who will have experienced a
spell of unemployment, and the larger population of beneficiaries means that the consequences of the
prior mechanism will be greater. But, quantitatively, all of these effects are small.

3

checks) it takes somewhat more time until the transfers reach the beneficiaries. Countering this disadvantage is the fact that the MPC of UI recipients is higher than that
of stimulus check recipients, and, furthermore, the insurance nature of the UI payments
reduces the precautionary saving motive. In the end, our model says that these two
forces roughly balance each other, so that the “multiplied bang for the buck” of the two
policies is similar. In the welfare metric, however, there is considerable marginal value
to UI recipients even if they receive some of the benefits after the recession is over (and
no multiplier exists). Hence, in the welfare metric, the relative value of UI benefits is
increased compared with the policy of sending stimulus checks.
We conclude that extended UI benefits should be the first weapon employed from
this arsenal, as they have a greater welfare benefit than stimulus checks and a similar
“multiplied bang for the buck.” But a disadvantage is that the total amount of stimulus
that can be accomplished with the UI extension is constrained by the fact that only a
limited number of people become unemployed. If more stimulation is called for than can
be accomplished via the UI extension, checks have the advantage that their effects scale
almost linearly in the size of the stimulus—see ? for a more detailed exposition of the
relation between MPC and stimulus size. The wage tax cut is also, in principle, scalable,
but its effects are smaller than those of checks because recipients have lower MPCs and
marginal utility than check and UI recipients. In the real world, a tax cut is also likely
the least flexible of the three tools: UI benefits can be further extended, and multiple
rounds of checks can be sent, but multiple rounds of changes in payroll tax rates would
likely be administratively and politically more difficult.
One theme of our paper is that which policies are better or worse, and by how much,
depends on both the quantitative details of the policies and the quantitative modeling
of the economy.
But the tools we are using could be reasonably easily modified to evaluate a number
of other policies. For example, in the COVID-19 recession in the US, not only was
the duration of UI benefits extended, but those benefits were also supplemented by
substantial extra payments to every UI recipient. We did not calibrate the model to
match this particular policy, but the framework could accommodate such an analysis.

1.1 Related literature
{sec:lit}

Several papers have looked at fiscal policies that have been implemented in the U.S. under
the lens of a structural model. ? analyses the effects of different fiscal policies using
seven different models. The models are variants of two-agent heterogeneous agent models
and make no attempt to match the full distribution of liquid wealth as we do in this
paper. We also attempt to match the microdata on household consumption behavior,
much of which has come more recently. More closely aligned to the methodology of
our paper are ?, ?, and ? which look at the role of automatic stabilizers. By contrast,
we consider discretionary policies that have been invoked after a recession has begun.
Another related paper is ? who studies fiscal policies implemented during the pandemic.
They find that targeted stimulus through an increase in unemployment benefits has a
much larger multiplier than an untargeted policy. In contrast, we find that untargeted

4

stimulus checks have slightly higher multiplier effects when compared with a targeted
policy extending eligibility for unemployment insurance. Our results derive from the
fact that—as in the data—even high liquid wealth consumers have relatively high MPCs
in our model.
This paper is also closely related to the empirical literature that aims to estimate the
effect of transitory income shocks and stimulus payments. We particularly focus on ?,
who use Norwegian administrative panel data with sizable lottery wins to estimate the
MPC out of transitory income in that year, as well as the pattern of expenditure in the
following years. We build a model that is consistent with the patterns they identify.
Examples of the literature that followed the Great Recession in 2008 are ? and ?. These
papers exploit the effectively random timing of the distribution of stimulus payments
and identify a substantial consumption response. The results indicate an MPC that is
difficult to reconcile with representative agent models.
Thus, the paper relates to the literature presenting HA models that aim to be consistent with the evidence from the micro-data. An example is ?, who build a model where
agents save in both liquid and illiquid assets. The model yields a substantial consumption
response to a stimulus payment, since MPCs are high both for constrained, low-wealth
households and for households with substantial net worth that is mainly invested in the
illiquid asset (the “wealthy hand-to-mouth”). ? present an HA model that is similar in
many respects to the one we study. Their focus is on predicting the consumption response
to the 2020 U.S. CARES Act that contains both an extension of unemployment benefits
and a stimulus check. However, neither of these papers attempts to evaluate and rank
the effectiveness of different stimulus policies, as we do.
? discuss different mechanisms used in HA models to obtain a high MPC and the
tension between that and fitting the distribution of aggregate wealth. We use one of the
mechanisms they consider, ex-ante heterogeneity in discount factors, and build a model
that delivers both high average MPCs and a distribution of liquid wealth consistent with
the data. The model allows for splurge consumption and thus also delivers substantial
MPCs for high-liquid-wealth households. This helps the model match not only the initial
MPC, but also the propensity to spend out of a windfall for several periods after it is
obtained.
In our model, consumers do not adjust their labor supply in response to the stimulus
policies. Our assumption is broadly consistent with the empirical findings in ? and ?.
However, the literature is conflicted on this subject and ? and ? find that extensions
of unemployment insurance affec both search decisions and vacancy creation leading
to a rise in unemployment. ?, on the other hand, evaluates the effect of extending
unemployment insurance in the period from 2008 to 2014. He finds that this extension
raised aggregate demand and implied a lower unemployment rate than without the
policy. However, he does not attempt to compare the stimulus effects of extending
unemployment insurance with other policies.
One criterion to rank policies is the extent to which spending is “multiplied,” and
our paper therefore relates to the vast literature discussing the size and timing of any
multiplier. Our focus is on policies implemented in the aftermath of the Great Recession,
a period when monetary policy was essentially fixed at the zero lower bound (ZLB). We

5

therefore do not consider monetary policy responses to the policies we evaluate in our
primary analysis, and our work thus relates to papers such as ? and ?, who argue that
fiscal multipliers are higher in such circumstances. ? present an HA model with both
incomplete markets and nominal rigidities to evaluate the size of the fiscal multiplier
and also find that it is higher when monetary policy is constrained. Unlike us, they
focus on government spending instead of transfers and are interested in different options
for financing that spending. ? also focus on fiscal multipliers for government spending
and show how they differ in representative agent and HA models with different sources
of nominal rigidities. ? investigate empirically whether there is support for the modelbased results that fiscal multipliers are higher in certain states. While they find evidence
that multipliers are higher when there is slack in the economy or the ZLB binds, the
multipliers they find are still below one in most specifications. In any case, we condition
on policies being implemented in a recession—when, this literature argues, multipliers
are higher—but it is not crucial for our purposes whether the multipliers are greater
than one or not. We are concerned with relative multipliers, and the multiplier is only
one of the two criteria we use to rank policies.
The second criterion to rank policies is our measure of welfare. Thus, the paper relates
to the recent literature on welfare comparisons in HA models. Both ? and ? introduce
ways of decomposing welfare effects. In the former case, these are aggregate efficiency,
redistribution and insurance, while the latter further decomposes the insurance part
into intra- and intertemporal components. These papers are related to ours, but we do
not decompose the welfare effects. Regardless of decomposition, we want to (1) use a
welfare measure as an additional way of ranking policies and (2) introduce a measure
that abstracts from any incentive for a planner to redistribute in the steady state (or
“normal” times).

6

References
Akerlof, George A, and Janet L Yellen (1985): “A near-rational model of the
business cycle, with wage and price inertia,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
100(Supplement), 823–838.
Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub (2018): “The
Intertemporal Keynesian Cross,” Working Paper 25020, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bayer, Christian, Benjamin Born, Ralph Luetticke, and Gernot J Müller
(2023): “The Coronavirus Stimulus Package: How Large is the Transfer Multiplier?,”
The Economic Journal.
Beraja, Martin, and Nathan Zorzi (2023): “On the Size of Stimulus Checks: How
Much is Too Much?,” Discussion paper, MIT, Working paper.
Bhandari, Anmol, David Evans, Mikhail Golosov, and Thomas Sargent
(2021): “Efficiency, Insurance, and Redistribution Effects of Government Policies,”
Discussion paper, tomsargent.com.
Broda, Christian, and Jonathan A Parker (2014): “The economic stimulus
payments of 2008 and the aggregate demand for consumption,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 68, S20–S36.
Broer, Tobias, Per Krusell, and Erik Öberg (2023): “Fiscal Multipliers: A
Heterogenous-Agent Perspective,” Quantitative Economics, 14(3), 799–816.
Browning, Martin, and Thomas F. Crossley (2009): “Shocks, Stocks, and Socks:
Smoothing Consumption Over a Temporary Income Loss,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 7(6), 1169–1192.
Carroll,
Christopher,
Jiri Slacalek,
Kiichi Tokuoka,
and
Matthew N. White (2017): “The distribution of wealth and the marginal
propensity to consume,” Quantitative Economics, 8(3), 977–1020, At
https://www.econ2.jhu.edu/people/ccarroll/papers/cstwMPC.
Carroll, Christopher D, Edmund Crawley, Jiri Slacalek, and Matthew N
White (2020): “Modeling the consumption response to the CARES act,” Covid
Economics, 10, 62–86.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, and Loukas Karabarbounis (2016): “The limited
macroeconomic effects of unemployment benefit extensions,” Discussion paper,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2011):
“When is the government spending multiplier large?,” Journal of Political Economy,
119(1), 78–121.

7

Cochrane, John H (1989): “The Sensitivity of Tests of the Intertemporal Allocation
of Consumption to Near-Rational Alternatives,” The American Economic Review, pp.
319–337.
Coenen, Günter, Christopher J Erceg, Charles Freedman, Davide
Furceri, Michael Kumhof, René Lalonde, Douglas Laxton, Jesper
Lindé, Annabelle Mourougane, Dirk Muir, et al. (2012): “Effects of fiscal
stimulus in structural models,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1),
22–68.
Crawley, Edmund, and Andreas Kuchler (2023): “Consumption Heterogeneity: Micro Drivers and Macro Implications,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 15(1), 314–41.
Dávila, Eduardo, and Andreas Schaab (2022): “Welfare Assessments with
Heterogeneous Individuals,” Available at SSRN 4102027.
Eggertsson, Gauti B (2011): “What fiscal policy is effective at zero interest rates?,”
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 25(1), 59–112.
Fagereng, Andreas, Martin B. Holm, and Gisle J. Natvik (2021):
“MPC Heterogeneity and Household Balance Sheets,” American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 13(4), 1–54.
Ganong, Peter, Fiona E Greig, Pascal J Noel, Daniel M Sullivan,
and Joseph S Vavra (2022): “Spending and Job-Finding Impacts of Expanded
Unemployment Benefits: Evidence from Administrative Micro Data,” Working Paper
30315, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ganong, Peter, and Pascal Noel (2019): “Consumer Spending during
Unemployment: Positive and Normative Implications,” American Economic Review,
109(7), 2383–2424.
Graham, James, and Robert McDowall (2024): “Mental Accounts and
Consumption Sensitivity Across the Distribution of Liquid Assets,” Available at SSRN
4793885.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Fatih Karahan, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman
(2019): “Unemployment Benefits and Unemployment in the Great Recession: The
Role of Macro Effects,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Working paper 19499.
Hagedorn, Marcus, Iourii Manovskii, and Kurt Mitman (2017): “The
Impact of Unemployment Benefit Extensions on Employment: The 2014 Employment
Miracle?,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working paper
20884.

8

(2019): “The fiscal multiplier,” Working paper, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Hai, Rong, Dirk Krueger, and Andrew Postlewaite (2020): “On the welfare
cost of consumption fluctuations in the presence of memorable goods,” Quantitative
economics, 11(4), 1177–1214.
Indarte, Sasha, Raymond Kluender, Ulrike Malmendier, and Michael
Stepner (2024): “What Explains the Consumption Decisions of Low-Income
Households?,” Department of Economics.
Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L Violante (2014): “A model of the consumption
response to fiscal stimulus payments,” Econometrica, 82(4), 1199–1239.
(2022): “The Marginal Propensity to Consume in Heterogeneous Agent Models,”
Working Paper 30013, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kekre, Rohan (2022): “Unemployment Insurance in Macroeconomic Stabilization,”
The Review of Economic Studies.
Krueger, Dirk, Kurt Mitman, and Fabrizio Perri (2016): “Macroeconomics
and household heterogeneity,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 2, pp. 843–921.
Elsevier.
Kueng, Lorenz (2018): “Excess Sensitivity of High-Income Consumers*,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(4), 1693–1751.
Laibson, David, Peter Maxted, and Benjamin Moll (2022): “A Simple Mapping
from MPCs to MPXs,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Maxted, Peter, David Laibson, and Benjamin Moll (2024): “Present Bias
Amplifies the Household Balance-Sheet Channels of Macroeconomic Policy,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, p. qjae026.
McKay, Alisdair, and Ricardo Reis (2016): “The role of automatic stabilizers in
the US business cycle,” Econometrica, 84(1), 141–194.
(2021): “Optimal automatic stabilizers,” The Review of Economic Studies,
88(5), 2375–2406.
Olafsson, Arna, and Michaela Pagel (2018): “The liquid hand-to-mouth:
Evidence from personal finance management software,” The Review of Financial
Studies, 31(11), 4398–4446.
Parker, Jonathan A (2017): “Why don’t households smooth consumption? Evidence
from a $25 million experiment,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(4),
153–183.

9

Parker, Jonathan A, Nicholas S Souleles, David S Johnson, and Robert
McClelland (2013): “Consumer spending and the economic stimulus payments of
2008,” American Economic Review, 103(6), 2530–53.
Phan, Nam (2024): “The Welfare Consequences of Countercyclical Fiscal Transfers,”
Manuscript, Queens Economics Department.
Ramey, Valerie A, and Sarah Zubairy (2018): “Government spending multipliers
in good times and in bad: evidence from US historical data,” Journal of political
economy, 126(2), 850–901.

10

