Welfare and Spending Effects
of Consumption Stimulus Policies
2025-06-11

Christopher D. Carroll1
Edmund Crawley2
William Du3
Ivan Frankovic4
Håkon Tretvoll5
Using a heterogeneous agent model calibrated to match measured spending dynamics
over four years following an income shock (?), we assess the effectiveness of three fiscal
stimulus policies employed during recent recessions. Unemployment insurance (UI)
extensions are the clear “bang for the buck” winner when effectiveness is measured
in utility terms. Stimulus checks are second best and have two advantages (over UI):
they arrive faster, and they are scalable to any desired size. A temporary (two-year) cut
in the rate of wage taxation is considerably less effective than the other policies and has
negligible effects in the version of our model without a multiplier.
html:
PDF:
Slides:
GitHub:

https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/
HAFiscal.pdf
https://llorracc.github.io/HAFiscal/HAFiscal-Slides.pdf
https://github.com/llorracc/HAFiscal

Forthcoming, Quantitative Economics

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board, the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Eurosystem, or Statistics Norway. This project has received funding from the
European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant
agreement No. 851891) and from the Research Council of Norway (grant No. 326419).
The authors would like to thank seminar participants at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Deutsche
Bundesbank, the European Central Bank, the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Oslo Macro Group, the
Society for Computational Economics in 2023 and 2024, Statistics Norway, the University of Pennsylvania, Vanderbilt
University, and West Virginia University for valuable feedback. The authors would also like to thank Sasha Indarte,
Adrian Monninger, Plutarchos Sakellaris, three anonymous referess, and the editor Morten Ravn for insightful comments
on earlier versions of the paper.
1 Carroll: Department of Economics, Johns Hopkins University, ccarroll@jhu.edu, and NBER

.

2 Crawley: Federal Reserve Board, edmund.s.crawley@frb.gov
3 Du: Johns Hopkins University, wdu9@jhu.edu
4 Frankovic: Deutsche Bundesbank, ivan.frankovic@bundesbank.de
5 Tretvoll: Statistics Norway and HOFIMAR at BI Norwegian Business School, Hakon.Tretvoll@ssb.no

1 Introduction
{sec:intro}

Fiscal policies that aim to boost consumer spending in recessions have been tried in
many countries in recent decades. The nature of such policies has varied widely, perhaps
because traditional macroeconomic models have not provided plausible guidance about
which ones are likely to be most effective—either in reducing misery (a ‘welfare metric’)
or in increasing output (a ‘GDP metric’).
But a new generation of macro models has shown that when microeconomic heterogeneity across consumer circumstances (wealth; income; education) is taken into account,
the consequences of an income shock for consumer spending depend on a measurable
object: the intertemporal marginal propensity to consume (iMPC) introduced in ?.
The iMPC extends the notion of a marginal propensity to consume to account for the
speed at which households spend. Fortuitously, new sources of microeconomic data,
particularly from Scandinavian national registries, have recently allowed the first highquality measurements of the iMPC (?).
Even in models that can match a given measured iMPC pattern, the relative merits of
alternative policies depend profoundly both on the metric (welfare or GDP) and on the
quantitative structure of the rest of the model – for example, whether multipliers exist
and whether the degree of multiplication is different under different economic conditions.
Here, after constructing a microeconomically credible heterogeneous agent (HA) model,
we examine that model’s implications for how effects of stimulus policies depend on the
existence and timing of any “multipliers,” which, following ?, we model in a clean and
simple way, so that the interaction of the multiplier (if any) with the other elements of
the model is reasonably easy to understand. This partial equilibrium analysis allows us
to transparently incorporate the possibility that multipliers may be larger in recessions.
But we understand that a richer general equilibrium framework could introduce transmission channels absent from the partial-equilibrium-plus-multiplier analysis, so we also
analyze a standard HANK-and-SAM general equilibrium model modified to embed our
households’ consumption responses.1
By “microeconomically credible,” we mean, at a minimum, a model that can match
both the cross-sectional distribution of liquid wealth (following ?’s definition of liquid
wealth) and the entire pattern of the iMPC from ? (see Figure 1a for their data and our
model’s fit to it).
Standard HA models can match both the pattern of spending in years 1-4 (for a shock
that arrives in year 0) and the initial distribution of liquid wealth.2 But even a brief
look at the figure convinces the eye that spending in the initial period when the shock
arrives seems out of line with the smooth declining pattern in years 1-4. The eye is
not wrong: HA models that match liquid assets and the spending pattern in years 1-4
seriously underpredict the amount of immediate spending that occurs on receipt of the
income shock.
1

The Econ-ARK toolkit with which the partial equilibrium model was solved constructs the
Jacobians necessary to connect a steady-state version of the model to the SSJ Toolkit. Our HANKand-SAM model builds on ??.
2
For example, the model in ?.

1

We call this initial extra spending the ‘excess initial MPC.’ Below, we describe a
substantial and longstanding literature in which the pattern of an excess initial MPC
has been documented, and a vigorous recent literature confirming the fact with different
datasets and proposing various potential theoretical explanations.
If multipliers are operative only in recessions (or are more powerful in recessions), a
model that fails to capture the excess initial MPC might generate the wrong answers for
the effectiveness of the alternative fiscal policies.
The purpose of our paper is not to weigh in on which of the alternative models of an
excess initial MPC is right. Instead we sought the simplest modeling device that would
capture the empirical fact of an excess initial MPC and permit unambiguous welfare
calculations. We accomplish this by adding to the standard model something we call
“splurge” beahavior, in which each household has a portion of income out of which they
have a high MPC, and the remainder of their income is disposed of as in standard micro
models with mildly impatient but time-consistent consumers. Because the available
evidence finds high initial MPCs even among wealthy households, we assume that this
splurge behavior is the same across households and independent of their liquid wealth
holdings.3
Our resulting structural model could be used to evaluate a wide variety of consumption
stimulus policies. We examine three that have been implemented in recent recessions
in the United States (and elsewhere): an extension of unemployment insurance (UI)
benefits, a means-tested stimulus check, and a payroll tax cut.
Our first metric of policy effectiveness is “spending bang for the buck”: For a dollar of
spending on a particular policy, how much multiplication is induced? First, we calculate
the policy-induced spending dynamics in an economy with no multiplier. We then follow
?’s approach to modeling the aggregate demand externality, in which output depends
mechanically on the level of consumption relative to steady state. But in our model,
the aggregate demand externality is only switched on when the economy is experiencing
a recession—there is no multiplication for spending that occurs after our simulated
recession is over.
Even without multiplication, a utility-based metric can justify countercyclical policy
on welfare grounds because the larger idiosyncratic shocks to income that occur during
a recession may justify a greater-than-normal degree of social insurance. Because our
model’s outcomes reflect the behavior of utility-maximizing consumers, we can calculate
a measure of the effectiveness of alternative policies: their effect on consumers’ welfare.
We call this “welfare bang for the buck.”
The principal difference between the two metrics is that what matters for the degree of
spending multiplication is how much of the policy-induced extra spending occurs during
the recession (when the multiplier matters), while effectiveness in the utility metric also
depends on who is doing the extra spending (because the recession hits some households
much harder than others).
3

Proponents of the theoretical models described in our literature review in section 1.1 may choose
to think of our splurge as a reduced form for a deeper explanation; we would not necessarily resist such
an interpretation.

2

Because high-MPC consumers tend to have high marginal utility, a standard aggregated welfare function would favor redistribution to such consumers even in the absence
of a recession. We are interested in the degree of extra motivation for social insurance
that is present in a recession, so we construct our social welfare metric specifically to
measure only the incremental social welfare effect of alternative policies during recessions
(beyond whatever redistributional logic might apply during expansions – see section 4.3).
When the multiplier is active, any reduction in aggregate consumption below its
steady-state level directly reduces aggregate productivity and thus labor income. Hence,
any policy stimulating consumption will also boost incomes through this aggregate
demand multiplier channel.
Our results are intuitive. In the economy with no recession multiplier, the benefit
of a sustained payroll tax cut is negligible.4 When a multiplier exists, the tax cut has
more benefits, especially if the recession continues long enough that most of the spending
induced by the tax cut happens while the economy is still in recession (and the multiplier
still is in force). The typical recession, however, ends long before our ‘sustained’ wage
tax cut is reversed—and even longer before lower-MPC consumers have spent down most
of their extra after-tax income. Accordingly, even in an economy with a multiplier that
is powerful during recessions, much of the wage tax cut’s effect on consumption occurs
when any multiplier that might have existed in a recession is no longer operative.
Even leaving aside any multiplier effects, the stimulus checks improve welfare more
than the wage tax cut, because at least a portion of such checks go to unemployed people
who have both high MPCs and high marginal utilities (while wage tax cuts, by definition,
go only to persons who are employed and earning wages). The greatest “welfare bang for
the buck” comes from the UI insurance extension, because many of the recipients are in
circumstances in which they have a much higher marginal utility than they would have
had in the absence of the recession, whether or not the aggregate demand externality
exists.
And, in contrast to the wage-tax cut, both the UI extension and the stimulus checks
concentrate most of the marginal increment to consumption at times when the multiplier
(if it exists) is still powerful. A disadvantage of the UI extension relative to the stimulus
checks, in terms of “spending bang for the buck,” is that it takes somewhat more time
until the transfers reach the beneficiaries. The stimulus checks are assumed to be
distributed immediately in the same quarter as the recession starts. Countering this
disadvantage is the fact that the MPC of UI recipients is higher than that of stimulus
check recipients, and, furthermore, the insurance nature of the UI payments reduces the
precautionary saving motive. In the end, our model says that these two forces roughly
4

One reason there is any (welfare) benefit at all, even for people who have not experienced an
unemployment spell, is that the heightened risk of unemployment during a recession increases the
marginal value of current income because it helps them build extra precautionary reserves to buffer
against the extra risk. A second benefit is that, for someone who becomes unemployed some time into the
recession, the temporary tax reduction will have allowed them to accumulate a larger buffer to sustain
them during unemployment. Finally, in a recession, there are more people who will have experienced a
spell of unemployment, and the larger population of beneficiaries means that the consequences of the
prior mechanism will be greater. But, quantitatively, all of these effects are small.

3

balance each other, so that the spending bang for the buck of the two policies is similar.
In the welfare metric, however, there is considerable marginal value to UI recipients even
if they receive some of the benefits after the recession is over (and no multiplier exists).
Hence, in the welfare metric, the relative value of UI benefits is increased compared with
the policy of sending stimulus checks.
We conclude that extended UI benefits should be the first weapon employed from
this arsenal, as they have a greater welfare benefit than stimulus checks and a similar
(multiplied) spending effect. But a disadvantage is that the total amount of stimulus
that can be accomplished with the UI extension is constrained by the fact that only a
limited number of people become unemployed. If more stimulation is called for than
can be accomplished via the UI extension, checks have the advantage that their effects
scale almost linearly in the size of the stimulus—see ? for a more detailed exposition
of the relation between MPC and stimulus size. The wage tax cut is also, in principle,
scalable, but its effects are smaller because recipients have lower MPCs and marginal
utility than check and UI recipients. In the real world, a tax cut is also likely the least
flexible of the three tools: UI benefits can be further extended, and multiple rounds of
checks can be sent, but multiple rounds of changes in payroll tax rates would likely be
administratively and politically more difficult.
One theme of our paper is that which policies are better or worse, and by how much,
depends on both the quantitative details of the policies and the quantitative modeling
of the economy.
But the tools we are using could be reasonably easily modified to evaluate a number
of other policies. For example, in the COVID-19 recession in the US, not only was
the duration of UI benefits extended, but those benefits were also supplemented by
substantial extra payments to every UI recipient. We did not calibrate the model to
match this particular policy, but the framework could accommodate such an analysis.

1.1 Related literature
{sec:lit}

Our paper is part of the growing literature using structural heterogeneous agent models
to examine effects of countercyclical fiscal policies.
Because the quantitative implications of HA models depend profoundly on getting
certain microeconomic details right, we begin with a brief synopsis of what we view as
the relevant takeaways from the micro literature.
1.1.1 Microeconomic Evidence
For our purposes, the single most important kind of micro evidence is on the iMPC;
we explicitly target our partial equilibrium model to match the microeconomic iMPC
estimates of ?, whose evidence is the gold standard because their millions of datapoints
allow precise estimates over a long horizon (five years) and because their natural experiment is almost ideal (a lottery win is a random shock by construction). Particularly
striking is their evidence on the excess initial MPC. Any worry that their Norwegian
evidence might not apply in other countries is allayed by results in a new paper by ?,

4

who use data from a Greek lottery and find that the induced extra monthly spending in
the first three months after the win is triple the induced extra spending in the remaining
observed months.
There are, of course, many prominent papers dating all the way back to ? finding that
the initial spending response to shocks is vastly greater than implied by a representative
agent model (in particular a steady stream of state-of-the-art papers by Jonathan Parker
and his collaborators). In much of that literature there has been some evidence that the
initial spending response was out of line with the subsequent effects (see, e.g., ?; ?; ?),
but data limitations usually made it difficult to sharply pin down the temporal pattern
of spending (especially beyond the six month horizon).
Another striking result in ? was that even households with high liquid wealth exhibited
high MPC’s. ?, ?, ?, and ? among others also provide strong evidence of high MPCs
for high-liquid-wealth households.5
1.1.2 Microeconomic Theories
A rapidly growing recent literature has used a variety of data sources to reconfirm the
high initial MPC, but with an eye to providing theoretical explanations. We sketch this
literature because different theories might have different implications for the spending
consequences of a shock.
One possibility is that the burst of initial spending is rationalizable if the spending
is on durables (?). ? showed that in the frictionless case, spending on durable goods
should be vastly more responsive to an income shock than spending on nondurables. It
seems plausible that a model with a large number of goods that are durable at, say,
the quarterly or annual frequency could explain the ‘excess initial MPC’ as reflecting a
rational marginal propensity to eXpend (MPX).6
? combine a simplified model of durables spending with the assumption common in
behavioral economics that spending decisions are influenced by “present bias” (people
have time-inconsistent preferences). They present a back-of-the-envelope calculation
that yields a rough estimate that the ratio of initial spending on durables to the spending
that would occur if all spending were nondurable is roughly three to one (not far from
the ratio estimated in the Greek lottery episode studied by ?).
? use high frequency bank account data to study spending responses to the U.S. 2021

5

The “infrequent consumption good” model of ? has a similar flavor, but is not about MPC’s.
It aims at accounting for high saving rates among high-income households during normal times and
high consumption during episodes where the infrequent consumption good becomes available (such as
high-end health care or education expenses).
6
The NIPA accounts treat as ‘durable’ those goods whose expected lifetime is 3 years or more, but
at the annual (or quarterly) frequency many more goods (and even services) are arguably durable –
for example, ? mention clothes and shoes, and ? argue that many services are durable at the annual
frequency, which explains why people take vacations once a year.

5

stimulus, and find sustantial “excess MPC’s” especially among low income households;
like ? they lean toward present bias as an explanation.7
The logic of ? and ? suggests that the utility consequences of ‘near-rational’ deviations
from frictionless rational behavior is small. In that spirit, ? and ? present models with
bounded rationality and costly re-optimization. Building on this logic, ? argue that
costs of reoptimization cause consumers to resort to simple “quick-fix” consumption
heuristics; for small shocks, most people in their survey report that they anticipate that
their MPC’s would be one or zero.
The ‘splurge’ component of our consumption model is a simple modelling device
that lets the model match the empirical evidence, regardless of what the right deep
explanation(s) may be. As we will show, the model with our splurge component is
consistent with all of what we described above as the key ‘takeaways’ from the micro
literature.
1.1.3 Macroeconomic Models
Turning now to the macroeconomic setting, a number of papers have addressed questions
that are similar in spirit to ours. For example, ?, ?, and ? have examined the role of
automatic stabilizers in HA models.
But we follow much of the recent literature in treating recessions as ‘MIT shocks’ –
unanticipated events. And the policies we examine are discretionary, which arguably
makes sense as reflecting what occurs when the automatic stabilizers have not automatically prevented a recession.8
A relevant early contribution is by ? who build a model where agents save in both
liquid and illiquid assets. Their model yields a substantial consumption response to a
stimulus payment, since MPCs are high both for low-wealth households and for the
many households (in their model) with high net worth but little liquid assets (the
“wealthy hand-to-mouth”). (Though the subsequent literature finding high MPC’s even
by wealthy households with ample liquidity casts doubt on this mechanism.)
? study discretionary fiscal policies implemented after a large shock, in their case
the COVID-19 pandemic. They find that targeted stimulus through an increase in
unemployment benefits has a much larger effect than an untargeted policy. In contrast,
we find that untargeted stimulus checks have slightly larger spending effects than a
7
A related theoretical insight is provided by ?, who shows that households anticipating their own
future consumption mistakes can rationally exhibit higher current MPCs; this is because they know
that any additional savings would be likely be disposed of suboptimally in the future.
8
In our model (and most others in the literature we are contributing to) consumers do not adjust
their labor supply in response to stimulus policies. This assumption is broadly consistent with the
empirical findings in ? and ?. However, the literature is conflicted on this subject; ? and ? argue
that extensions of unemployment insurance affect both search decisions and vacancy creation leading
to a rise in unemployment. ?, on the other hand, evaluates the effect of extending unemployment
insurance in the period from 2008 to 2014, and finds that this extension raised aggregate demand and
implied a lower unemployment rate than without the policy. Finally, ? conduct a meta-analysis of the
literature on how unemployment benefits impact unemployment duration, and they find that the effects
are modest.

6

targeted policy extending eligibility for unemployment insurance. The difference derives
from the fact that – in our model as in the data – even middle- and high-liquid-wealth
consumers have relatively high MPCs, which means that much more of the stimulus
checks get spent quickly.
? also study the U.S. fiscal response to the COVID-19 pandemic, using a HA model
similar in many respects to the one we study. They predicted9 the consumption response
to the 2020 U.S. CARES Act that contained both an extension of unemployment benefits
and a stimulus check. They resolve the tension between obtaining a realistic MPC
and fitting the distribution of liquid wealth by estimating the distribution of ex-ante
heterogeneity in discount factors that allows the model to match both kinds of data
(discount heterogeneity is one of several competing mechanisms for resolving that tension
discussed by ?). But the model in that paper does not match the subsequently published
evidence about the iMPC (?); does not incorporate a multiplier; and does not compare
the relative effectiveness of alternative stimulus policies.
Another related paper is ?, who analyze the output response to different fiscal policies
in a HANK and SAM model similar to the one we present in our robustness exercise. As
we do in Section 5, they examine the policies in a steady state rather than a recession.
Unlike us, they do not calibrate their model to match the wealth distribution and the
iMPCs, and they do not evaluate the policies using a welfare metric as we do in our
baseline partial equilibrium setting.
One criterion to rank policies is the extent to which induced spending is “multiplied,”
and our paper therefore relates to the vast literature discussing the size and timing of
any multiplier. Our focus is on policies pursued in the Great Recession, a period when
monetary policy was essentially fixed at the zero lower bound (ZLB). We therefore do not
consider monetary policy responses to the policies we evaluate in our primary analysis,
and our work thus relates to papers such as ? and ?, who argue that fiscal multipliers
are higher in such circumstances. ? present an HA model with both incomplete markets
and nominal rigidities to evaluate the size of the fiscal multiplier and also find that it is
higher when monetary policy is constrained. They focus on government spending instead
of transfers and are interested in the consequences of alternative options for financing
that spending. ? also focus on fiscal multipliers for government spending and show
how they differ in representative agent and HA models with different sources of nominal
rigidities. Finally, ? find empirical evidence that multipliers are higher when there is
slack in the economy or the ZLB binds. In any case, our concern in the versions of our
model with multipliers is to compare the relative size of any differences in multiplication
across the policies we consider, which should thus be roughly scalable by the absolute
size of any multiplication effect, allowing a reader to scale our results by their preferred
estimate of the magnitude of recessionary multipliers.
Aside from the size of spending effects (whether multiplied or not), we are interested
in ranking policies in terms of their welfare consequences. Thus, the paper relates to
the recent literature on welfare comparisons in HA models. Both ? and ? introduce
9

“predicted” because the paper was published long before any data on the actual response were
available.

7

ways of decomposing welfare effects. In the former case, these are aggregate efficiency,
redistribution and insurance, while the latter further decomposes the insurance part into
intra- and intertemporal components.
One part of these decompositions is tricky: Under standard calibrations like the ones
we use, any change in redistribution tends to have powerful consequences on welfare.
We presume that there are real (but unmodeled) reasons that the equilibrium degree
of redistribution in normal (nonrecessionary) times is much less than the model would
call for. We therefore develop a welfare measure that abstracts from any incentive for a
planner to increase redistribution in the steady state (or “normal” times).

1.2 Organization
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents our baseline partial equilibrium
model of households’ consumption and saving problem as well as how we model a
recession and the potential response in terms of three different consumption stimulus
policies. Section 3 describes the steps we take to parameterize the model and discusses
the implications for some moments that we do not target. In section 4 we compare the
three policies implemented in a recession both in terms of their multipliers and in terms
of a welfare measure that we introduce. Section 5 presents a general equilibrium HANK
and SAM model where we compare the multipliers of the same three policies to the
partial equilibrium results. Section 6 concludes, and, finally, the appendix shows results
from a version of the model without splurge consumption and provides more details of
the HANK and SAM model discussed in Section 5.

{sec:org}

2 Model
{sec:model}

Consumers differ by their level of education and, within education group, by subjective
discount factors (calibrated to match the within-group distribution of liquid wealth).
We first describe each kind of consumer’s problem, given an income process with permanent and transitory shocks calibrated to their type, as well as type-specific shocks to
employment. The next step describes the arrival of a recession and the policies we study
as potential fiscal policy responses. The last section discusses an extension incorporating
aggregate demand effects that induce feedback from aggregate consumption to income
and (via the marginal propensity to consume) back to consumption, amplifying the effect
of a recession when it occurs.
A consumer i has education e(i) and a subjective discount factor βi . The consumer
faces a stochastic income stream, yi,t , and chooses to consume a fraction of that income
when it arrives—the ‘splurge’, described in the introduction.10 With what is left over,
the consumer chooses to optimize consumption without regard to the fraction that was
10

One attractive feature of the splurge assumption is that it is also consistent with evidence from ?,
that spending drops sharply following the large and predictable drop in income after the exhaustion of
unemployment benefits; see Section 3.3.4.

8

already spent. Therefore, consumption each period for consumer i can be written as
ci,t = csp,i,t + copt,i,t ,

(1)

where ci,t is total consumption, csp,i,t is the splurge consumption, and copt,i,t is the
consumer’s optimal choice of consumption after splurging. Splurge consumption is
simply a fraction of income:
csp,i,t = ςyi,t ,
(2)
while the optimized portion of consumption is chosen to maximize the perpetual-youth
lifetime expected-utility-maximizing consumption, where D is the end-of-life probability:
∞
X

βit (1 − D)t E0 u(copt,i,t ).

(3)

t=0

We use a standard CRRA (constant relative risk aversion) utility function, so u(c) =
c1−γ /(1 − γ) for γ ̸= 1 and u(c) = log(c) for γ = 1, where γ is the coefficient of relative
risk aversion. The optimization is subject to the budget constraint, given existing market
resources mi,t and income state, and a no-borrowing constraint:
ai,t = mi,t − ci,t ,
mi,t+1 = Rai,t + yi,t+1 ,
ai,t ≥ 0,

(4)

where R is the gross interest factor for accumulated assets ai,t .

2.1 The income process
Consumers face a stochastic income process with permanent and transitory shocks to
income, along with unemployment shocks. In normal times, consumers who become
unemployed receive unemployment benefits for two quarters. Permanent income evolves
according to:
pi,t+1 = ψi,t+1 Γe(i) pi,t ,
(5)
where ψi,t+1 is the shock to permanent income and Γe(i) is the average growth rate of
income for the consumer’s education group e(i).11 The realized growth rate of permanent
income for consumer i is thus Γ̂i,t+1 = ψi,t+1 Γe(i) . The shock to permanent income is
normally distributed with variance σψ2 .
The actual income a consumer receives will be subject to the individual’s employment

11

We model the rate of growth for permanent income for each education group and keep this rate
unchanged during periods of unemployment. There is evidence, e.g. in ?, that unemployment, especially
in a recession, leads to permanent income loss. This finding could be added to the model—see ? for an
example—but is not material to the evaluation of stimulus payments here so we have chosen to keep
the model simple.

9

{eq:model}

status as well as transitory shocks, ξi,t :
if employed
yi,t = ρb pi,t , if unemployed with benefits



ρnb pi,t , if unemployed without benefits



ξi,t pi,t ,

(6)

where ξi,t is normally distributed with variance σξ2 , and ρb and ρnb are the replacement
rates for an unemployed consumer who is or is not eligible for unemployment benefits,
respectively.
A Markov transition matrix Π generates the unemployment dynamics where the
number of states is given by 2 plus the number of periods that unemployment benefits
last. An employed consumer can continue being employed or move to being unemployed
e(i)
e(i)
e(i)
with benefits.12 The first row of Π is thus given by [1 − πeu
, πeu
, 0], where πeu
indicates the probability of becoming unemployed from an employed state and 0 is a
vector of zeros of the appropriate length. Note that we allow this probability to depend
on the education group of consumer i and will calibrate this parameter to match the
average unemployment rate for each education group. Upon becoming unemployed, all
consumers face a probability πue of transitioning back into employment and a probability
1 − πue of remaining unemployed with one less period of remaining benefits. After
transitioning into the unemployment state where the consumer is no longer eligible for
benefits, the consumer will remain in this state until becoming employed again. The
probability of becoming employed is thus the same for each of the unemployment states
and education groups.

2.2 Recessions and policies
We model the arrival of a recession, and the government policy response to it, as an
unpredictable event—an MIT shock. We have four types of shocks: one representing a
recession and one for each of the three different policy responses we consider. The policy
responses are usually modeled as in addition to the recession, but we also consider
a counterfactual in which the policy response occurs without a recession in order to
understand the welfare effects of the policy.
Recession. At the onset of a recession, several changes occur. First, the unemployment
rate for each education group doubles: Those who would have been unemployed in the
absence of a recession are still unemployed, and an additional number of consumers move
from employment to unemployment. Second, conditional on the recession continuing,
the employment transition matrix is adjusted so that unemployment remains at the new
high level and the expected length of time for an unemployment spell increases. In
our baseline calibration, discussed in detail in section 3.3.1, we set the expected length
of an unemployment spell to one and a half quarters in normal times, and this length
increases to four quarters in a recession. Third, the end of the recession occurs as a
12

That is, as long as we assume that there is at least one period of unemployment benefits.

10

{sec:recessions}

Bernoulli process calibrated for an average length of recession of six quarters. Finally,
at the end of a recession, the employment transition matrix switches back to its original
probabilities, and, as a result, the unemployment rate trends down over time, back to
its steady-state level. The details of how certain model parameters change in a recession
are presented in section 3.3.2.
Policies. The policies we consider in response to a recession are inspired by the Economic Stimulus Act of 2008 and the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010. The former included means tested stimulus checks
in the form of tax rebates, and the latter included both an extension of unemployment
benefits and a tax cut. Based on these examples we therefore consider the following
stimulus policies in our framework:
1. Stimulus check. In this policy response, the government sends money to every
consumer that directly increases the household’s market resources. The checks are
means-tested depending on permanent income. A check for $1,200 is sent to every
household with permanent income less than $100,000, and this amount is then linearly
reduced to zero for households with a permanent income greater than $150,000. Similar
policies were implemented in the U.S. in 2001, 2008, and during the pandemic.
2. Extended unemployment benefits. In this policy response, unemployment benefits
are extended from two quarters to four quarters. That is, those who become unemployed
at the start of the recession, or who were already unemployed, will receive unemployment
benefits for up to four quarters (including quarters leading up to the recession). Those
who become unemployed one quarter into the recession will receive up to three quarters
of unemployment benefits. These extended unemployment benefits will occur regardless
of whether the recession ends, and no further extensions are granted if the recession
continues. This policy reflects temporary changes made to unemployment benefits in
the U.S. following the great recession.
3. Payroll tax cut. In this policy response, employee-side payroll taxes are reduced for
a period of eight quarters.13 During this period, which continues irrespective of whether
the recession continues or ends, employed consumers’ income is increased by 2 percent.
The income of the unemployed is unchanged by this policy. Households also believe
there is a 50-50 chance that the tax cut will be extended by another two years if the
recession has not ended when the first tax cut expires.14 The payroll tax cut introduced
in the U.S. in 2010 was itself an extension of previously implemented cuts and had a
two-year horizon.

13

Although payroll taxes are paid by both the employer and the employee, the payroll tax cuts in
the U.S. have been applied only the employee side.
14
The belief that the payroll tax cut may be extended makes little difference to the results.

11

Financing the policies. Some work in the HA macro literature has shown that if taxes
are raised immediately to offset any fiscal stimulus, results can be very different than
they would be if, as occurs in reality, recessionary policies are debt financed. However,
typical fiscal rules assume that any increase in debt gets financed over a long interval.
Accordingly, almost all of the effects of any particular fiscal rule will be similar for each of
our policies so long as the great majority of the debt is repaid after the short recessionary
period that is our main focus.
To keep our analysis as simple as possible, we do not model the debt repayment. Any
of a variety of fiscal rules could be imposed for the period following our short period of
interest, but we did not want to choose any particular fiscal rule in order to avoid making
a choice that has little consequence for our key question. Advocates of alternative fiscal
rules likely already have intuitions about how such rules’ economic consequences differ,
but those consequences—under our partial equilibrium analysis—will be similar for all
three policies we consider. Alternative choices of fiscal rules will therefore not affect the
ranking of policies that is our principal concern.15

2.3 Aggregate demand effects
Our baseline model is a partial equilibrium model that does not include any feedback
from aggregate consumption to income. In an extension to the model, we add aggregate
demand effects during the recession. The motivation for this specification comes from
the idea that spending in an economy with substantial slack and in which the central
bank is unable to prevent a recession will result in higher utilization rates and greater
output. By contrast, government spending in an economy running at potential with
an active monetary policy will not succeed in increasing output. The recent inflation
experience of the U.S. provides some evidence that output responds highly non-linearly
to aggregate demand. This idea is explored in a recent revival of research into non-linear
Phillips curves, such as ? and ?.
With this extension, any changes in consumption away from the steady-state consumption level feed back into labor income. Aggregate demand effects are evaluated
as
 κ

 Ct , if in a recession
(7)
AD(Ct ) =  C̃
1,
otherwise,
where C̃ is the level of consumption in the steady state. Idiosyncratic income in the
aggregate demand extension is multiplied by AD(Ct ):
yAD,i,t = AD(Ct )yi,t .

(8)

The series yAD,i,t is then used for each consumer’s budget constraint.

15

In our general equilibrium analysis in section 5, we apply a fiscal rule that assumes debt is slowly
paid back over time.

12

{sec:ADeffects}

3 Parameterizing the model
This section describes how we set the model’s parameters. First, we estimate the extent
to which consumers ‘splurge’ when receiving an income shock. Given the lack of empirical
evidence on the marginal propensity to consume over time for the US, we instead use
Norwegian data to estimate the splurge. Specifically, we calibrate our model to the
Norwegian economy and match evidence from Norway on the profile of the marginal
propensity to spend over time and across different wealth levels, as provided by ?.16
Second, we set up the full model on U.S. data, taking the splurge factor as given
from the Norwegian estimation. In the full model, agents differ according to their level
of education and their subjective discount factors. A subset of the parameters in the
model are calibrated equally for all types, and some parameters are calibrated to be
specific to each education group. Finally, a distribution of subjective discount factors is
estimated separately for each education group to match features of each within-group
liquid wealth distribution.

{sec:parameters}

3.1 Estimation of the splurge factor
The splurge allows us to capture the shorter- and longer-term response of consumption
to income shocks, especially for consumers with significant liquid wealth. The main
aim of this paper, however, is to rank consumption stimulus policies, not to provide
a microfoundation for the splurging behavior. We view the splurge factor as a model
device that enables us to rank the policies in a model that is consistent with the best
available micro-evidence of spending patterns over time after a transitory income shock.
In the Online Appendix B we provide results from our model without a splurge factor.
There we show that such a model provides a worse fit to the moments in the data that
we are interested in, but not dramatically so, and that our conclusions regarding the
ranking of the policies are not affected. However, in our view, this version of the model
requires households with unreasonably low discount factors.
The specific exercise we carry out in this section, is to show that our model can
account well for the results of ?, who study the effect of lottery winnings in Norway
on consumption using millions of records from the Norwegian population registry. We
calibrate our model to reflect the Norwegian economy and, using their results, estimate
the splurge factor, as well as the distribution of discount factors in the population, to
match two empirical moments.
First, we take from ? the marginal propensity to consume out of a one-period income
shock. We target not only the initial (aggregate) response of consumption to the income
shock, but also the subsequent effect on consumption in years one through four after
the shock. We also target the initial consumption response in the cross-section, i.e.
across the quartiles of the liquid wealth distribution, for which empirical estimates are
also provided. The shares of lottery winnings expended at different time horizons, as
16

The Online Appendix B discusses an alternative calibration method, which solely relies on US
data. The main results derived in that calibration are in line with those discussed in the main text.

13

{sec:splurge}

found in ?, are plotted in figure 1a. Table 1 (second row) shows the initial consumption
response across liquid wealth quartiles.
Second, we match the steady-state distribution of liquid wealth in the model to its
empirical counterpart. Because of the lack of data on the liquid wealth distribution in
Norway, we use the corresponding data from the United States, assuming that liquid
wealth inequality is comparable across these countries.17 Specifically, we impose as
targets the cumulative liquid wealth shares for the entire population at the 20th, 40th,
60th, and 80th income percentiles, which, in data from the Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF) in 2004 (see section 3.2 for further details), equal 0.03 percent, 0.35 percent, 1.84
percent, and 7.42 percent, respectively. Hence, 92.6 percent of the total liquid wealth is
held by the top income quintile. We also target the mean liquid wealth to income ratio
of 6.60. The data are plotted in figure 1b.

1.0

Model
Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2021)

Cumulative liquid wealth share

0.5

% of lottery win spent

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Model
Data

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0

1

2
year

3

4

0

(a) Share of lottery win spent

20

40

60

Liquid wealth percentile

80

100

(b) Distribution of liquid wealth

{fig:aggmpclotterywin}

{fig:liquwealthdistribu

Figure 1 Marginal propensity to consume over time and the liquid wealth
distribution in the model and the data

{fig:splurge_estima

Note: Panel (a) shows the fit of the model to the dynamic consumption response estimated in
?; see their figure A5. Panel (b) shows the fit of the model to the distribution of liquid wealth
(see Section 3.2 for the definition) from the 2004 SCF.

For this estimation exercise, the remaining model parameters are calibrated to reflect
the Norwegian economy. Specifically, we set the real interest rate to 2 percent annually
and the unemployment rate to 4.4 percent, in line with ?. The quarterly probability
to survive is calibrated to 1 − 1/160, reflecting an expected working life of 40 years.
Aggregate productivity growth is set to 1 percent annually, following ?. The unemployment net replacement rate is calibrated to 60 percent, following ?. Finally, we set the

17
Data from the Norwegian tax registry contains information on liquid assets, but not liquid debt.
Only total debt is reported – which is mainly mortgage debt. Therefore, we cannot construct liquid
wealth as ? can for the U.S.

14

{foot:liqwealth}

Model
Data

1st WQ

2nd WQ

MPC
3rd WQ

4th WQ

Agg

K/Y

0.27
0.39

0.49
0.39

0.60
0.55

0.66
0.66

0.50
0.51

6.59
6.60

Table 1 Marginal propensities to consume across wealth quartiles and the total
population as well as the wealth to income ratio, in the model and according
to the data
{tab:MPC_WQ}

real interest rate on liquid debt to 13.6 percent, following data from the Norwegian debt
registry ?.18
Estimates of the standard deviations of the permanent and transitory shocks are taken
from ?, who estimate an income process on administrative data for Norwegian males from
1971 to 2014. The estimated annual variances for the permanent and transitory shocks
are 0.004 and 0.033, respectively.19 As in ?, these are converted to quarterly values by
multiplying the permanent and transitory shock variances by 1/4 and 4, respectively.
Thus, we obtain quarterly standard deviations of σψ = 0.0316 and σξ = 0.363.
Using the calibrated model, we simulated unexpected lottery winnings and calculate
the share of the lottery spent in each year. Specifically, each simulated agent receives a
lottery win in a random quarter of the first year of the simulation. The size of the lottery
win is itself random and spans the range of lottery sizes found in ?. The estimation
procedure minimizes the distance between the target and model moments by selecting
the splurge factor and the distribution of discount factors in the population, where
the latter are assumed to be uniformly distributed in the range [β − ∇, β + ∇]. We
approximate the uniform distribution of discount factors with a discrete approximation
and let the population consist of seven different types.
The estimation yields a splurge factor of 0.249 and a distribution of discount factors
described by β = 0.968 and ∇ = 0.0578. Given these estimated parameters and the
remaining calibrated ones, the model is able to replicate the time path of consumption
in response to a lottery win from ? and the targeted distribution of liquid wealth
very well, see Figure 1. Also, the targeted moments discussed in Table 1 are captured
relatively well. In particular, the model is able to account for the empirical fact, in the
first column, that the MPC for high-wealth agents is substantially larger than zero.

18

Specifically, we determine the average volume-weighted interest rate on liquid debt, which consists
of consumer loans, credit and payment card debt and all other unsecured debt. We use data from
December 2019. Note that although these data let us pin down aggregate quantities, they do not solve
the issue referred to in footnote 17, since we cannot link them to the tax registry at the individual level.
We set the borrowing limit on liquid debt to zero.
19
As shown in ?, an income process of the form that we use here is more accurately estimated using
moments in levels not differences. Hence, we take the numbers from column 3 of Panel C in their table
4.

15

3.2 Data on permanent income, liquid wealth, and education
Before we move on to the parameterization of the full model, we describe in detail the
data that we use to get measures of permanent income, liquid wealth, and the division of
households into educational groups in the United States. We use data on the distribution
of liquid wealth from the 2004 wave of the SCF. We restrict our attention to households
where the head is of working age, which we define to be in the range from 25 to 62.
The SCF-variable “normal annual income” is our measure of the household’s permanent
income, and, to exclude outliers, we drop the observations that make up the bottom 5
percent of the distribution of this variable. The smallest value of permanent income for
households in our sample is thus $16,708.
Liquid wealth is defined as in ? and consists of cash, money market, checking, savings,
and call accounts; directly held mutual funds; and stocks and bonds. We subtract off
liquid debt, which is the revolving debt on credit card balances. Note that the SCF
does not contain information on cash holdings, so these are imputed with the procedure
described in Appendix B.1 of ?, which also describes the credit card balances that are
considered part of liquid debt. We drop any households that have negative liquid wealth.
Households are classified into three educational groups. The first group, “Dropout,”
applies to households where the head of household has not obtained a high school
diploma; the second group, “Highschool,” includes heads of households who have a
high school diploma and those who, in addition, have some years of college education
without obtaining a bachelor’s degree; and the third group, “College,” consists of heads
of households who have obtained a bachelor’s degree or higher. With this classification
of the education groups, the Dropout group makes up 9.3 percent of the population, the
Highschool group 52.7 percent, and the College group 38.0 percent.
With our sample selection criteria, we are left with a sample representing about 61.3
million U.S. households.

{sec:SCFdata}

3.3 Parameters in the full model
{sec:paramsFull}

With households classified into the three education groups using the SCF data, we
proceed to set the parameters of the model as follows. First, we calibrate a set of parameters that apply to all types of households in the model. Second, we calibrate another
set of parameters that are specific to each education group to capture broad differences
across these groups. Finally, given the calibrated parameters we estimate discount factor
distributions for each education group that allow us to match the distribution of liquid
wealth in each group.
The model is a simplified model for households in that we do not take into account
heterogeneity across household size or composition. The households are ex-ante heterogeneous in their subjective discount factors as well as their level of education. We classify
the education level of the household based on the education of the head of the household,
and we typically think of individual characteristics as applying to that person.
A period in the model is one quarter. This choice makes it realistic to consider stimulus
policies that are implemented in the same period as a recession starts.

16

3.3.1 Calibrated parameters — Normal times
Table 2 presents our calibration of the model parameters in normal times. Panel A lists
parameters that are calibrated equally across all types in the model, and Panel B lists
parameters in the model that are education specific. In the next subsection we present
how certain model parameters change when the economy enters a recession.
Preferences, survival and interest rates. All households are assumed to have a
coefficient of relative risk aversion equal to γ = 2. We also assume that all households
have the same propensity to splurge out of transitory income gains and set ς = 0.249,
the value estimated in section 3.1. However, each education group is divided into types
that differ in their subjective discount factors. The distributions of discount factors for
each education group are estimated to fit the distribution of liquid wealth within that
group, and this estimation is described in detail in section 3.3.3. Regardless of type,
households face a constant survival probability each quarter. This probability is set to
1 − 1/160, reflecting an expected working life of 40 years. The real interest rate on
households’ savings is set to 1 percent per quarter.
Labor market risk while employed. When consumers are born, they receive
an initial level of permanent income. This initial value is drawn from a log-normal
distribution that depends on the education level the household is born with. For each
education group, the parameters of the distribution are determined by the mean and
standard deviation of log-permanent income for households in that group where the head
of the household is of age 25 in the SCF 2004. For the Dropout group, the mean initial
value of quarterly permanent income is $6,200; for the Highschool group, it is $11,100;
and for the College group, it is $14,500. The standard deviations of the log-normal
distributions for each group are, respectively, 0.32, 0.42, and 0.53.
While households remain employed, their income is subject to both permanent and
transitory idiosyncratic shocks. These shocks are distributed equally for the three
education groups. The standard deviations of these shocks are taken from ?, who set
the standard deviations of the transitory and permanent shocks to σξ = 0.346 and
σψ = 0.0548, respectively.
Permanent income also grows, on average, with a growth rate Γe(i) that depends
on the level of education. These average growth rates are based on numbers from ?,
who construct age-dependent expected permanent income growth factors using numbers
from ? and fit the age-dependent numbers to their life-cycle model. We construct the
quarterly growth rates of permanent income in our perpetual-youth model by taking
the average of the age-dependent growth rates during a household’s working life. The
average gross quarterly growth rates that we obtain for the three education groups are
then Γd = 1.0036, Γh = 1.0045, and Γc = 1.0049.
Unemployment. Consumers also face the risk of becoming unemployed and will then
have access to unemployment benefits for a certain period. The parameters describing
the unemployment benefits in normal times are based on the work of ?, who study
the effects on household income of unemployment and of running out of eligibility for
benefits. The unemployment benefits replacement rate is thus set to ρb = 0.7 for all
households, and when benefits run out, the unemployment replacement rate without

17

{sec:calib}

Table 2 Calibrated Model Parameters — Normal times
Panel (A) Parameters that apply to all types
Parameter

Notation

Risk aversion
Splurge
Survival probability, quarterly
Risk free interest rate, quarterly (gross)
Standard deviation of transitory shock
Standard deviation of permanent shock
Unemployment benefits replacement rate (share of PI)
Unemployment income w/o benefits (share of PI)
Avg. duration of unemp. benefits in normal times (quarters)
Avg. duration of unemp. spell in normal times (quarters)
Probability of leaving unemployment
Consumption elasticity of aggregate demand effect

γ
ς
1−D
R
σξ
σψ
ρb
ρnb

Value

πue
κ

2.0
0.249
0.994
1.01
0.346
0.0548
0.7
0.5
2
1.5
0.667
0.3

Dropout

Highschool

College

9.3
6.2
0.32
1.0036
8.5
6.2

52.7
11.1
0.42
1.0045
4.4
3.1

38.0
14.5
0.53
1.0049
2.7
1.8

Panel (B) Parameters calibrated for each education group
Percent of population
Avg. quarterly PI of “newborn” agent ($1000)
Std. dev. of log(PI) of “newborn” agent
Avg. quarterly gross growth rate of PI (Γe )
Unemployment rate in normal times (percent)
e
Probability of entering unemployment (πeu
, percent)

Note: The first three rows show numbers from the 2004 SCF. The fourth row are averages of growth
rates from ?. The fifth row are numbers for 2004 from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the sixth row
are calculated from these unemployment rates.

Panel (A) shows parameters calibrated the same for all types. Panel (B) shows parameters
calibrated for each education group. “PI” refers to permanent income.
{tab:calibration}

any benefits is set to ρnb = 0.5. These replacement rates are set as a share of the
households’ permanent income and are based on the initial drop in income upon entering
an unemployment spell, presented in figure 3 in ?.20
The duration of unemployment benefits in normal times is set to two quarters, so that
our Markov transition matrix Π has four states. This length of time corresponds to the
mean duration of unemployment benefits across U.S. states from 2004 to mid-2008 of 26
weeks, reported by ?.
The probability of transitioning out of unemployment is set to match the average
duration of an unemployment spell in normal times. In data from the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, this average duration was 19.6 weeks or 1.5 quarters in 2004. We do not
have data on education-specific duration rates, however, so we set the average duration
of unemployment to 1.5 quarters for all households. This implies that the transition
probability from unemployment to employment is set to πue = 2/3.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics provide data on unemployment rates for different
education groups, and we match the average rate in each group in 2004 by setting
an education-specific probability of transitioning from employment into unemployment.
Note that this calibration strategy is consistent with the results in ? who finds that the
main difference between education groups is in the incidence of unemployment, and not
its duration.21 More recent work by ? includes data upto 2009 and echoes ?’s results.
The average unemployment rate in 2004 was 8.5 percent for the Dropout group, 4.4
percent for the Highschool group, and 2.7 percent for the College group. These values
imply that the probabilities of transitioning into unemployment in normal times are
c
h
d
= 1.8 percent, respectively.22
= 3.1 percent, and πeu
= 6.2 percent, πeu
πeu
Finally, the strength of the aggregate demand effect in recessions is determined by the
consumption elasticity of productivity. We follow ? and set this to κ = 0.3.
3.3.2 Calibrated parameters — Recession
Table 3 shows the model parameters that change when a recession hits. Panel A shows
the change in two parameters that apply to all types, and Panel B shows changes in some
parameters that differ across education groups. For completeness, panel C summarizes
20
See the lines for their UI exhaustee sample including and excluding UI income. ? also point out
that “UI benefits replace about 40 percent of the lost earnings on average” (page 894). For a household
with two income earners with equal income, these findings would mean that income drops to 70 percent
when one earner becomes unemployed and to 50 percent when benefits run out. In this paper we ignore
several of the channels studied by ? such as within household insurance and other social programs that
can provide income even after UI benefits have run out.
21
? states that “the reduction of the incidence of unemployment [at higher education levels] is
found to be far more important than the reduced duration of unemployment in creating the educational
differentials in unemployment rates” (page 1).
22
Also note that the probability of transitioning from employment to unemployment is the probability
of a job separation times the conditional probability of unemployment given a job separation. ? reports
that both of these are lower for higher education levels. For our calibration, this means that a higher
job finding rate within the quarter of the job separation for more educated workers translates into a
lower probability of transitioning from employment to unemployment during a quarter. In that sense,
our calibration is consistent with short-term job-finding rates being higher for more educated workers.

19

{sec:calibRecession}

the remaining parameters describing how we model a recession and the three policies we
consider as potential responses to a recession.
The two immediate changes that occur at the outset of a recession is that the unemployment rate doubles for all education groups, and the expected duration of an
unemployment spell increases from 1.5 to 4 quarters. The duration of unemployment
is the same across the three education groups, and this implies that the probability of
leaving unemployment is set to πue = 0.25 in a recession.
The increase in the expected duration of unemployment combined with the doubling
of the education-specific unemployment rates pin down new values for the probabilities
of transitioning from employment to unemployment during the recession. Due to the
large increase in the unemployment duration, the values that we obtain end up being
slightly smaller than those transition probabilities in normal times. The probability πeu
in a recession is set to 5.1 percent for the Dropout group, 2.4 percent for the Highschool
group, and 1.4 for the College group.
Our calibration of the transition probabilities between employment and unemployment
during a recession are thus broadly in line with the results of ?. They find that
unemployment duration does not vary much between education groups and that the
flow from unemployment to employment drops sharply for all groups in a recession. The
flow into unemployment is more stable, but they find that it tends to increase a little bit
in recessions.23 This differs from the small decrease in the transition probabilities from
employment into unemployment that our calibration strategy implies, which follows from
our choice of targeting a doubling of the unemployment rate for each group rather than
an even larger increase.
3.3.3 Estimating the discount factor distributions
Discount factor distributions are estimated separately for each education group to match
the distribution of liquid wealth for households in that group. To do so, we let each
education group consist of types that differ in their subjective discount factor, β. The
discount factors within each group e ∈ {d, h, c} are assumed to be uniformly distributed
in the range [βe − ∇e , βe + ∇e ]. The parameters βe and ∇e are chosen for each group
separately to match the median liquid-wealth-to-permanent-income ratio and the 20th,
40th, 60th, and 80th percentile points of the Lorenz curve for liquid wealth for that
group. We approximate the uniform distribution of discount factors with a discrete
approximation and let each education group consist of seven different types.
Panel A of table 4 shows the estimated values of (βe , ∇e ) for each education group.
The panel also shows the minimum and maximum values of the discount factors we
actually use in the model when we use a discrete approximation with seven values to
approximate the uniform distribution of discount factors. Panel B of table 4 shows
that with these estimated distributions, we can exactly match the median liquid-wealthto-permanent-income ratios for each education group. Figure 2 shows that with the
estimated distributions, the model quite closely matches the distribution of liquid wealth
23

See the bottom row of Figure 8 in ? for these results.

20

{sec:estimBetas}

Table 3 Calibrated Model Parameters — Recession
Panel (A) Parameters that apply to all types
Parameter

Notation

Avg. duration of unemp. spell in a recession (quarters)
Probability of leaving unemployment in a recession

Value
4
0.25

πue

Panel (B) Parameters calibrated for each education group
Dropout

Highschool

College

17.0
5.1

8.8
2.4

5.4
1.4

Unemployment rate at the start of a recession (percent)
e
, percent)
Probability of entering unemployment (πeu

Panel (C) Parameters describing policy experiments
Parameter

Value

Average length of recession
Size of stimulus check
PI threshold for reducing check size
PI threshold for not receiving check
Extended unemployment benefits
Length of payroll tax cut
Income increase from payroll tax cut
Belief (probability) that tax cut is extended

6 quarters
$1,200
$100,000
$150,000
4 quarters
8 quarters
2 percent
50 percent

Panel (A) shows the parameters that apply to all types that change in a recession. Panel (B)
shows the education-specific model parameters that change in a recession. Panel (C) shows
numbers further describing how we model a recession and the three policies we consider. “PI”
refers to permanent income.
{tab:calibrationRece

21

within each education group as well as for the population as a whole. Thus, our model
does not suffer from the “missing middle” problem, identified in ?, in which the middle
of the wealth distribution has too little wealth.24
Panel (A) Estimated discount factor distributions
Dropout

Highschool

College

(βe , ∇e )
(0.719, 0.318) (0.925, 0.077) (0.983, 0.014)
(Min, max) in approximation (0.447, 0.991) (0.859, 0.990) (0.971, 0.995)
Panel (B) Estimation targets
Median LW/ quarterly PI (data, percent)
Median LW/ quarterly PI (model, percent)

Dropout

Highschool

College

4.64
4.64

30.2
30.2

112.8
112.8

Table 4 Estimated discount factor distributions and estimation targets
{tab:estimBetas}

Note: Panel (A) shows the estimated parameters of the discount distributions for each education
group. It also shows the minimum and maximum values we use in our discrete approximation
to the uniform distribution of discount factors for each group. Panel (B) shows the weighted
median ratio of liquid wealth to permanent income from the 2004 SCF and in the model. In the
annual data from the SCF, the annual PI is divided by 4 to obtain a quarterly number.

Note that several of the types in the Dropout group have very low discount factors and
are very impatient. In this way, the model fits the feature of the data for the Dropout
group that the bottom quintiles do not save at all and do not accumulate any liquid
wealth. Very low estimates for discount factors are in line with those obtained in the
literature on payday lending.25

24
One technical point to note about our estimation, is that we impose the constraint that the Growth
Impatience Condition (GIC), discussed in ?, is never violated. (The GIC is required to prevent the
ratio of total wealth to total income of any group from approaching infinity. It does this by making sure
that the growth of wealth of the group is less than or equal to the growth of income.) The constraint
is imposed by calculating an upper bound for the discount factors β GIC where the GIC holds with
equality. The estimation procedure ensures that no type ends up with a discount factor higher than
this upper bound.
25
See, for example, ?, who estimate two-week discount rates of 21 percent, and ?, who estimate an
initial period discount factor between 0.74 and 0.83 in a model where a period is eight weeks long.
Both of these papers use quasi-hyperbolic preferences, so the estimates are not directly comparable
with parameters in our model. Nevertheless, they support the point that very high discount rates are
necessary to model the part of the population that takes out payday loans at very high interest rates.

22

0

20

40 60 80 100
Percentile

College (38 pct)

0

20

40 60 80 100
Percentile
Data

Cumulative share of wealth

Cumulative share of wealth

25
20
15
10
5
0

Dropout (9.3 pct)

25
20
15
10
5
0

Cumulative share of wealth

Cumulative share of wealth

25
20
15
10
5
0

25
20
15
10
5
0

Highschool (52.7 pct)

0

20

40 60 80 100
Percentile
Population

0

Model

20

40 60 80 100
Percentile

Figure 2 Distributions of liquid wealth within each education group and for the
whole population from the 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances and from the
model with estimated discount factor distributions

{fig:LorenzPts}

Note: The discount factor distributions are estimated separately for each education group
to fit the median liquid-wealth-to-permanent-income ratio and the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th
percentile points of the Lorenz curve for liquid wealth for that group. The “Population” panel
compares the wealth distribution that results from pooling the three groups in the model to the
overall wealth distribution in the data.

3.3.4 Implications for non-targeted moments
Before we move on to compare different consumption stimulus policies in the calibrated
model, we also report implications of the model for some non-targeted moments. Panel A
of table 5 shows the wealth distribution across the three education groups in the data
and in the model. The model matches these shares quite closely, which may not be
surprising given that we calibrate the size of each group and we manage to fit the wealth
distribution within each group separately. The panel also reports the average marginal
propensity to consume for the different groups. To be comparable to numbers reported
in ?, these are calculated as the average MPC in the year of a lottery win. Lottery wins
occur in a random quarter of the year that differs across individuals. The MPC for an

23

{sec:nonTargetedMo

individual depends on the spending pattern after the win, and these are averaged across
individuals within each education group.
Panel B of table 5 shows similar numbers to Panel A, sorted by quartiles of the
liquid wealth distribution instead of education groups. Our model yields a slightly more
concentrated liquid wealth distribution than in the data. However, it does produce
a fairly high MPC even for households in the highest quartile of the liquid wealth
distribution. This is consistent with the results found in the Norwegian data by ?,
but also with recent results in ?. In an administrative dataset from a large US financial
institution, they find that the spending response to an income receipt is large across
the distribution of liquid asset holdings. In our model, we obtain this result due to the
inclusion of the splurge factor. As shown in the Online Appendix B, the model is not able
to generate a high MPC for the highest wealth quartile without splurge consumption.
Panel (A) Non-targeted moments by education group
Percent of liquid wealth (data)
Percent of liquid wealth (model)
Avg. lottery-win-year MPC
(model, incl. splurge)

Dropout

Highschool

College

Population

0.8
1.2

17.9
16.8

81.2
82.0

100
100

0.78

0.61

0.38

0.54

Panel (B) Non-targeted moments by wealth quartile
Percent of liquid wealth (data)
Percent of liquid wealth (model)
Avg. lottery-win-year MPC
(model, incl. splurge)

WQ 4

WQ 3

WQ 2

WQ 1

0.14
0.12

1.60
0.98

8.51
3.85

89.76
95.06

0.74

0.61

0.48

0.32

Table 5 Model fit with respect to non-targeted moments

{tab:nonTargetedM

Note: Panel (A) shows percent of liquid wealth held by each education group in the 2004 SCF
and in the model. It also shows the average MPCs after a lottery win for each education group.
The MPCs are calculated for each individual for the year of a lottery win, taking into account
that the win takes place in a random quarter of the year that differs across individuals. The
MPCs are averaged across individuals within each education group. Panel (B) shows the same
numbers for the population sorted into different quartiles of the liquid wealth distribution.

Finally, we consider the implications of our model for two different patterns of spending
over time. The first pattern is the dynamics of spending after a lottery win from ?. This
pattern was used in the estimation of the splurge factor in section 3.1, but was not
targeted when estimating the discount factor distributions for each education group in
section 3.3.3. Figure 3a shows that the model that is estimated taking the value of the

24

splurge as given, results in a distribution of spending over time that is very similar to
the one found in the Norwegian data.
The second pattern concerns the dynamics of income and spending for households that
become unemployed and remain unemployed long enough for unemployment benefits to
expire. Figure 3b shows the pattern of income and spending for such households. ?
report the empirical result that nondurable spending drops by 12 percent the month
when benefits expire. Our quarterly model is broadly consistent with this as the drop
in spending the quarter after the expiry of UI benefits is 18 percent.
0.6

Model w/estimated splurge
Fagereng, Holm and Natvik (2021)

% of lottery win spent

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.1

Consumption
Income

1.0
1 = permanent income in last period of employment

0.5

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

0

1

2
Year

3

4

0

(a) Share of lottery win spent

1
2
3
4
quarters since last period of employment

5

(b)
Spending upon expiry of UI benefits
{fig:USaggmpclotterywin}

{fig:expiryUI}

Figure 3 Marginal propensity to consume over time and the spending upon expiry of
UI benefits in the model

{fig:untargetedMom

Note: Panel (a) compares the dynamic consumption response in the model to the estimates in
?; see their Figure A5. Panel (b) shows the evolution of income and spending for households
who remain unemployed long enough for UI benefits to expire; see Figure 2 in ?.

4 Comparing fiscal stimulus policies
In this section, we present our results where we compare three policies to provide fiscal
stimulus in our calibrated model. The policies we compare are a means-tested stimulus
check, an extension of unemployment benefits, and a payroll tax cut. Each policy is
implemented at the start of a recession, and we compare results both with and without
aggregate demand effects being active during the recession. First, we present impulse
responses of aggregate income and consumption after the implementation of each policy.
Then we compare the policies in terms of their cumulative multipliers and in terms of
their effect on a welfare measure that we introduce. Finally, based on these comparisons,
we can rank the three policies.

25

{sec:comparing}

4.1 Impulse responses
The impulse responses that we present for each stimulus policy are constructed as follows:
• A recession hits in quarter one.
• We compute the subsequent path for the economy without any policy introduced
in response to the recession.
• We also compute the subsequent path for the economy with a given policy introduced at the onset of the recession in quarter one.
• The impulse responses we present are then the difference between these two paths
for the economy and show the effect of a policy relative to a case where no policy
was implemented.
• The solid lines show these impulse responses for an economy where the aggregate
demand effects described in section 2.3 are not active, and the dashed lines show
impulse responses for an economy where the aggregate demand effects are active
during the recession.
• Red lines refer to aggregate labor and transfer income, and blue lines refer to
consumption.
Note that all graphs show the average response of income and consumption for recessions of different length. Specifically, we simulate recessions lasting from only one
quarter up to 20 quarters. We then take the sum of the results across all recession lengths
weighted by the probability of this recession length occurring (given our assumption of
an average recession length of six quarters).
4.1.1 Stimulus check
Figure 4a shows the impulse response of income and consumption when stimulus checks
are issued in the first quarter of a recession. In the model without a multiplier, the
stimulus checks account for 5 percent of the first quarter’s income. In the following
quarters, there are no further stimulus payments, and income remains the same as it
would have been without the stimulus check policy. Consumption is about 2.5 percent
higher in the first quarter, which includes the splurge response to the stimulus check.
Consumption then drops to less than 1 percent above the counterfactual, and the
remainder of the stimulus check money is then spent over the next few years. In the
model with aggregate demand effects, income in the first quarter is 6 percent higher than
the counterfactual, as the extra spending feeds into higher incomes. Consumption in this
model jumps to a higher level than without aggregate demand effects and comes down
more slowly as the feedback effects from consumption to income dampen the speed with
which income—and hence the splurge—return to zero. After a couple of years, when the
recession is most likely over and aggregate demand effects are no longer in place, income
is close to where it would be without the stimulus check policy, although consumption
remains somewhat elevated.

26

{sec:IRFs}

Income
Income (AD effects)
Consumption
Consumption (AD effects)

% difference relative to recession

6

6

6

5

5

4

4

4

3

3

3

2

2

2

1

1

1

5

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(a) stimulus check - IRF

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(b) UI extension - IRF

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(c) payroll tax cut - IRF

{fig:recessioncheckrelrecession}

{fig:recessionuirelrecession}

1.2

1.2

1.2

1.0

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
quarter

8

9

10

11

12

(d) stimulus check cumulative multiplier

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
quarter

8

9

10

11

12

(e) UI extension - cumulative
multiplier
{fig:recessioncheckrelrecession_Mult}

0.0

1

2

3

4

5

6 7
quarter

8

9

10

11

{fig:recessiontaxcutr

12

(f) payroll tax cut cumulative multiplier
{fig:recessionuirelrecession_Mult}

{fig:recessiontaxcutr

Figure 4 Impulse responses of aggregate income and consumption to policy shocks
during recessions with and without aggregate demand effects as well as
fig:Policyrelrecession
cumulative multipliers as a function of the horizon for the three policies.
Note: For the cumulative multiplier plots, policies are implemented during a recession with
aggregate demand effects active.

4.1.2 UI extension
The impulse responses in Figure 4b show the response to a policy that extends unemployment benefits from 6 months to 12 months for a period of a year. In the model
without aggregate demand effects, the path for income now depends on the number of
consumers who receive the extended unemployment benefits. These consumers are those
who have been unemployed for between 6 and 12 months. In the first quarter of the
recession, the newly unemployed receive unemployment benefits regardless of whether
they are extended or not. Therefore, it is in the second and third quarters, when
the effects of the recession on long-term unemployment start to materialize, that the
extended UI payments ramp up, amounting to an aggregate increase in quarterly income
by 0.7 percent. By the fifth quarter, the policy is no longer in effect, and income from
extended unemployment goes to zero. Consumption in the first quarter jumps by more
than income (by 0.3 percent), prompted by both the increase in expected income and
the reduced need for precautionary saving given the extended insurance. In the model

27

without aggregate demand effects, consumption is only a little above the counterfactual
by the time the policy is over. In the model with aggregate demand effects, there is
an extra boost to income of about the same size in the first and second quarters. As
this extra aggregate demand induced income goes to employed consumers, more of it is
saved, and consumption remains elevated several quarters beyond the end of the policy.
4.1.3 Payroll tax cut
The final impulse response graph, Figure 4c, shows the impulse response for a payroll tax
cut that persists for two years (eight quarters). In the model without aggregate demand
effects, income rises by close to 2 percent as the take-home pay for employed consumers
goes up. After the two-year period, income drops back to where it would have been
without the payroll tax cut. Consumption jumps close to 1 percent in response to the
tax cut. Over the period in which the tax cut is in effect, consumption rises somewhat as
the stock of precautionary savings goes up. Following the drop in income, consumption
drops sharply because of the splurge and then decreases over time as consumers spend
out the savings they built up over the period the tax cut was in effect. In the model with
aggregate demand effects, income rises by about 2.3 percent above the counterfactual
and then declines steadily as the probability that the recession remains active—and
hence the aggregate demand effects in place—goes down over time. Following the end
of the policy, the savings stock in the model with aggregate demand effects is high, and
consumption remains significantly elevated through the period shown.

4.2 Multipliers
In this section, we compare the fiscal multipliers across the three stimulus policies.
Specifically, we employ the cumulative multiplier, which captures the ratio between the
net present value (NPV) of stimulated consumption up to horizon t and the full-horizon
NPV of the cost of the policy. We thus define the cumulative multiplier up to horizon t
as
N P V (t, ∆C)
,
(9)
M (t) =
N P V (∞, ∆G)
where ∆C is the additional aggregate consumption spending up to time t in the policy
scenario relative to the baseline and ∆G is the total government expenditure
caused
by

Pt Qs
1
the policy. The NPV of a variable Xt is given by N P V (t, X) = s=0 i=1 Ri Xs .
The multiplier hence captures the amount of induced consumption at different horizons
relative to the total (i.e. full-horizon) cost of the policies.26
The second row in Figure 4 plots the cumulative multipliers at different horizons, and
table 6 shows the 10y-horizon multiplier for each policy. The stimulus check, which is
paid out in quarter one, exhibits the largest multiplier on impact. About 50 percent
of the total policy expenditure is immediately spent by consumers. After two years,
and because of the aggregate demand effects, consumption has increased cumulatively
26

In the case that there is no aggregate demand effect, these multipliers converge to 1 as t goes to
infinity.

28

{sec:multipliers}

{eqn:cumMultiplier}

10y-horizon Multiplier (no AD effect)
10y-horizon Multiplier (AD effect)
10y-horizon (1st round AD effect only)
Share of policy expenditure during recession
Share of policy cons. stimulus during recession

Stimulus check

UI extension

Tax cut

0.879
1.234
1.157
100.0%
74.2%

0.906
1.211
1.148
79.6%
81.1%

0.847
0.978
0.951
57.8 %
42.1 %

Table 6 Multipliers as well as the share of the policy expenditure and consumption
stimulus occurring during the recession
Note: Policies are implemented during a recession with or without the aggregate demand effect
active. The row "1st round AD effect only" captures the direct consumption impact of the
policies and the additional boost to consumption resulting from the aggregate demand effect
acting on the direct consumption impact. It does not include higher-round aggregate demand
effects materializing on aggregate demand effects acting on indirectly stimulated consumption. {tab:Multiplier}

by more than the cost of the stimulus check. Over time, the policy reaches a total
multiplier of 1.234. Without AD effects the policy only generates a multiplier of 0.879.
The last two rows in table 6 show the expected share of the policy expenditures and
stimulated consumption that occurs during a recession. For the stimulus check all of
the policy expenditures occur in the first quarter and thus with certainty during the
recession. However, since induced consumption also takes place during later periods at
which time the recession may have already ended, the share of stimulated consumption
during the recession is lower at 74.2%.
Since spending for the UI policy is spread out over four quarters (and peaks in quarters
two to three), the multiplier in the first quarter is considerably lower than in the case
of the stimulus check. However, the UI extension policy is targeted in the sense that it
provides additional income only to those consumers who have large MPCs, because of
unemployment. Also, over the medium-term UI extension expenditures are more likely
to induce consumption spending during the recession compared to the check stimulus,
see the last row in table 6. This is because UI extension expenditures affect agents
who spend the additional income relatively quickly once it reaches them. Therefore, the
cumulative mulitiplier of the UI extension exceeds that of the stimulus check after about
one year.
The payroll tax cut has the lowest multiplier irrespective of the considered horizon. A
multiplier of close to 1 is reached only after 10 years with AD effects. These relatively
small numbers reflect that policy spending lasts for a long time and is thus more likely
to occur after the recession has ended. Moreover, only employed consumers, often with
relatively low MPCs, benefit directly from the payroll tax cut. Therefore, the policy is
poorly targeted if the goal is to provide short-term stimulus.
Table 6 contains an additional (middle) row with results for an economy where we only
consider a “first-round” aggregate demand effect. To understand these values note that
the policies initially increase the income of consumers directly, which leads to a boost in

29

consumption. As a consequence, this boost triggers an aggregate demand effect which
increases the income of everyone and in turn leads to an additional boost to consumption.
We refer to the sum of this initial and the indirect boost to consumption as the firstround AD effect. However, the AD effect continues as the indirect boost to consumption
triggers another round of income increases which further boost consumption and so
on. One might argue that these higher-order rounds of the AD effect are not likely to
be anticipated by consumers. Since higher-order consumption boosts only materialize
if consumers anticipate them and act accordingly, the overall increase in consumption
might turn out to be smaller than suggested by the full AD effect. As shown in the
middle row of the table, the multipliers are smaller when excluding higher-order rounds.
Nevertheless, the ranking of the policies remains unchanged.

4.3 Welfare
{sec:welfare}

In this section, we look at the welfare implications of each stimulus policy. To do
so, we need a way to aggregate welfare in our model with individual utility functions.
In our model, some households consume much less than other households, and a social
planner with equal weights on each household could significantly increase welfare through
redistribution across households even in normal times. We are interested in the benefit
of carrying out fiscal policies in a recession, so we do not want our results to reflect the
benefits of redistribution inherent in our model in normal times.
Our welfare measure weights the felicity of a household at time t by the inverse of the
marginal utility of the same household in a counterfactual simulation in which neither
the recession occurred nor the fiscal policy was implemented, discounted by the real
interest rate.27 This weighting scheme means that in normal times the marginal benefit
or cost to a social planner of moving a dollar of consumption from one household at
one time period to another household at the same or a different time period is zero.
Hence, in normal times, any re-distributive policy has zero marginal benefit. However,
in a recession when the average marginal utility is higher than in normal times, there
can be welfare benefits to government borrowing to allow households to consume more
during the recession.
As with all social welfare measures, ours is not without ethical issues. We have chosen
our welfare measure over one with equal weights because an equal-weights measure
would be increasing with the size of any redistributive policy.28 However, similar to
Negishi weights, our welfare measure gives greater weight to households that are well
27

Discounting at the real interest rate accounts for the fact that a redistributive policy over time will
require borrowing or lending at the real interest rate. The preference discount factors of households
would appear in both the numerator and the denominator—the utility and marginal utility—and
therefore cancel and do not play a role in our welfare measure.
28
Using a version of an equal-weights measure results in an even greater welfare benefit to extended
unemployment insurance—see the previously distributed draft of this paper, ?. However, because the
size of the extended unemployment benefits policy is much larger in a recession compared to normal
times, while the size of the other two policies does not change significantly in a recession, this equalweights measure almost mechanically favored the extended unemployment benefits policy.

30

off.29 Furthermore, our welfare measure distinguishes between households that would
have suffered unemployment in normal times and households that are made unemployed
as a result of the recession—–giving the latter a higher weight in the social welfare
function.
Let cit,normal be the consumption—inclusive of the splurge—of household i at time t
in the baseline simulation with no recession and no fiscal policy. The (undiscounted)
marginal utility of an extra unit of consumption for this household in this time period
is u′ (cit,normal ).
Let cit,policy,Rec,AD be the consumption of the same household under the fiscal policy,
policy, possibly a recession, Rec ∈ {0, 1}, and in an economy with or without aggregate
demand effects, AD ∈ {0, 1}.30
We also denote the net present value of the government expenditures of the policy as
N P V (policy, Rec, AD). With this notation, we can now define the welfare bang for the
buck of a policy as:
N X
∞
X
1 u(cit,policy,Rec,AD ) − u(cit,none,Rec,AD )
1
,
W(policy, Rec, AD) =
N P V (policy, Rec, AD) i=1 t=0 Rt
u′ (cit,normal )
(10) {welfare_def6}
In normal times, this welfare measure will be exactly equal to one for any small-scale
fiscal expansion. To see this, note that the numerator, u(cit,policy,0,0 ) − u(cit,none,0,0 ), is
equal to the change in consumption multiplied by the marginal utility in normal times.
As the total change in consumption is equal to the net present value of the policy, which
we divide by, the total welfare measure is equal to one. Note that for large increases in
consumption, this measure may be less than one because the utility function is concave.

W(policy, Rec = 0, AD = 0)
W(policy, Rec = 1, AD = 0)
W(policy, Rec = 1, AD = 1)

Stimulus check

UI extension

Tax cut

0.96
1.00
1.35

0.85
1.83
2.15

0.99
0.97
1.11

Table 7 Welfare measures, calculated for policies implemented both out of and in a
recession with and without aggregate demand effects
{welfare6}

Table 7 shows the welfare measure for each policy as defined by equation (10). The
top row of the table shows the welfare measure for implementing each policy in normal
29
Negishi weights have been used in the climate literature as a way to separate the welfare benefits
of climate mitigation policies from broader questions about global income redistribution. Our problem
of separating the welfare benefits of recession mitigation policies from income redistribution in normal
times is similar, but complicated by our incomplete markets setup. With complete markets, under which
there is no potential benefit to redistributing consumption across time for any individual household,
our measure is identical to Negishi weights.
30
In the simulations, household i experiences the same permanent and transitory shock sequence,
but in the recession simulation some households experience unemployment during periods in which the
same household is employed in the baseline simulation.

31

times. For marginal policies, this is equal to one by definition. Indeed, the value for
both the stimulus check and the tax cut policy is very close to one. However, the welfare
measure for the extended unemployment policy in normal times is noticeably less than
one. This is because, although this policy is smaller in absolute size than the other
policies, its consumption effects are concentrated on a small number of households that
remain unemployed long enough to receive the extended benefits. For these households,
the effect on consumption is large enough such that the non linearity of the consumption
function leads to smaller welfare benefit than the marginal utility of consumption would
otherwise imply.
The second row of table 7 shows the welfare benefit of each policy in a recession
without any aggregate demand effects. Again, the stimulus check and tax cut policies
have measures that are close to one—pulling forward consumption has little welfare
benefit for the average household because the average marginal utility of consumption
is only a little higher than in normal times. By contrast, the policy sees benefits of 1.8
dollars for every dollar spent on extended UI benefits during a recession. This is because
many of the households who are unemployed for many quarters in the recession would
have never been unemployed, or quickly reemployed, in normal times and hence their
marginal utility of consumption is much higher in the recession than in normal times.
The third row of the table shows the welfare measure for each policy in a recession
in the version of the model with aggregate demand effects during the recession. The
payroll tax cut now has a noticeable benefit, as some of the tax cut gets spent during
the recession, resulting in higher incomes for all consumers. However, the tax cut is
received over a period of two years, and much of the relief may be after the recession—
and hence the aggregate demand effect—is over. Furthermore, because the payroll tax
cut goes only to employed consumers who have relatively lower MPCs, the spending
out of this stimulus will be further delayed, possibly beyond the period of the recession.
By contrast, the stimulus check is received in the first period of the recession and goes
to both employed and unemployed consumers. The earlier arrival and higher MPCs of
the stimulus check recipients mean more of the stimulus is spent during the recession,
leading to greater aggregate demand effects, higher income, and higher welfare. The
extended UI arrives, on average, slightly later than the stimulus check. However, the
recipients, who have been unemployed for at least six months, spend the extra benefits
relatively quickly, resulting in significant aggregate demand effects during the recession.
In contrast to the payroll tax cut, extended UI has the benefit of automatically reducing
if the recession ends early, making fewer consumers eligible for the benefit.

4.4 Comparing the policies
The results presented in sections 4.2 and 4.3 indicate that the extension of unemployment
benefits is the clear “bang for the buck” winner. The extended UI payments are well
targeted to consumers with high MPCs and high marginal utility, giving rise to large
multipliers and welfare improvements. The stimulus checks come in slightly higher when
measured by their short-term multiplier effect but are a distant second when measured
by their welfare effects. The stimulus checks have large initial multipliers because the

32

money gets to consumers at the beginning of the recession and therefore induce aggregate
demand effects more quickly. However, the checks are not well targeted to high-MPC
consumers, so even though the funds arrive early in the recession, they are spent out
more slowly than the extended unemployment benefits.31 Furthermore, the average
recipient of a stimulus check has a much lower marginal utility than consumers receiving
unemployment benefits, so the welfare benefits of this policy are substantially muted
relative to UI extensions.
The payroll tax cut policy does poorly by both measures: It has a low overall multiplier
and negligible welfare benefits. The reasons are that the funds are slow to arrive, so the
subsequent spending often occurs after the end of the recession, and that the payments
are particularly badly targeted—they go only to employed consumers.
While it is clear from the analysis that the extended unemployment benefits should
be the first tool to use, a disadvantage of them is that they are limited in their size. If a
larger fiscal stimulus is deemed appropriate, then stimulus checks provide an alternative
option that will stimulate spending during the recession even if the welfare benefits are
substantially lower than the UI extension.

4.5 Results in a model without the splurge
We introduce the splurge in our model with the aim of matching empirical evidence on
the dynamics of spending in response to transitory income shocks. The splurge acts as
a stand-in for competing theories for why agents may spend more out of those shocks
than suggested by a simple model in which forward-looking agents solely maximize
utility. However, it is natural to consider to what extent the splurge is in fact necessary
to match the empirical patterns and the implications for our results ranking the different
policies. To assess this we reestimate the model without the splurge and recompute all
our results regarding the relative effectiveness of the policies in this version of the model.
The details of this exercise are in the Online Appendix B. There we discuss how the
estimation of the Norwegian model in section 3.1 is affected if we do not include splurge
consumption, and the estimation of the discount factor distributions for each education
group in the US economy without taking the splurge as given. The general result is that
the we can match the liquid wealth distributions that we target also in models that do
not include a splurge. The models do so by estimating wider distributions of discount
factors than we found in section 3.1 and 3.3.3.
Without the splurge the models do struggle to exactly match the dynamics of spending
after a temporary income shock, however. In particular, for the estimation of the
Norwegian model, we can compare the model’s implications for MPCs for different
wealth quartiles to empirical estimates. Without the splurge, the model leads to an
MPC for the top wealth quartile that is far lower than in the data. In the US model
this MPC is also quite low compared to the model with splurge consumption, but for
the US we do not have an empirical estimate to compare to.
31

Theoretically, stimulus checks could be targeted to the highest-MPC households which, for smallsized policies, would mean households with an MPC of one. However, data limitations and other
practicalities make means-testing stimulus checks by income the extent of targeting in practice.

33

To evaluate the impact of splurge consumption on our ranking of the policies, we
simulate the three fiscal policies in the reestimated model without the splurge. There
are only minor shifts in the multipliers of the policies, but the lower average MPCs
reduces multipliers for the check and tax cut policy relative to the model with the
splurge. In contrast, the UI extension becomes slighlty more effective in stimulating
consumption as the wider distribution of discount factors implies a larger share of the
population that hits the borrowing constraint upon expiry of UI benefits. Hence, the
extension of UI benefits affects agents more strongly in the model without the splurge.
More importantly for the main conclusion of our paper, table 8 compares the welfare
implications of the policies in the two models. Generally, the welfare metric varies only
marginally across the models. When aggregate demand effects are active, we see slightly
larger differences in the welfare evaluation, with the check policy losing ground against
the UI extension. This is because the welfare impact of the check in the model with
the splurge is contingent on the checks being spent quickly due to a high average MPC
and thus generating strong aggregate demand effects while the recession is still ongoing.
In the absence of the splurge only liquidity-constrained agents spend the check money
quickly, such that recession-induced aggregate demand effects are smaller.

W(policy, Rec = 0, AD = 0)
W(policy, Rec = 1, AD = 0)
W(policy, Rec = 1, AD = 1)

Stimulus check

UI extension

Tax cut

0.97(0.96)
1.00(1.00)
1.27(1.35)

0.84(0.85)
1.80(1.83)
2.12(2.15)

0.99(0.99)
0.97(0.97)
1.09(1.11)

Table 8 Welfare measure, calculated for policies implemented both out of and in a
recession with and without aggregate demand effects.

Note: The values outside of the brackets capture the multipliers in the model without the
splurge, while those inside the brackets are mulitipliers with the splurge.
{tab:welfare6_Splur

Overall, we can conclude that the ranking of the policies remains unaffected by the
splurge. The splurge is thus helpful in matching available empirical evidence, but does
not affect the assessment of the effectiveness of the considered policies.

5 Robustness in a HANK and SAM Model
{sec:hank}

The main results of this paper are presented in a partial equilibrium setup with aggregate
demand effects that do not arise from general equilibrium effects. We think there are
many advantages to studying the welfare and multiplier effects in this setting without
embedding the model in general equilibrium. First, general equilibrium models often
struggle to adequately capture the feedback mechanisms between consumption and income, particularly the asymmetric nature of these relationships during recessionary versus expansionary periods. Additionally, a complete general equilibrium treatment would
necessitate the analysis of numerous complex channels including investment dynamics,

34

firm ownership structures and dividend distribution policies, inventory management,
and international trade flows—elements that, while important in their own right, would
potentially obscure the core mechanisms we aim to investigate.
Despite the advantages of our partial equilibrium approach, here we complement our
analysis with a general equilibrium HANK and SAM model, as standard as possible,
that is able to capture supply-side effects that are absent from the partial equilibrium
model. In particular, fiscal policies can generate labor market responses that our
partial equilibrium analysis does not address. These supply-side channels can affect
both the welfare implications and the fiscal multipliers of different policy interventions.
Furthermore, standard to the HANK and SAM literature, the general equilibrium model
generates a self-reinforcing precautionary saving channel that amplifies business cycles.
During a recession, heightened unemployment risk prompts households to increase savings and reduce consumption which in turn weakens both aggregate and labor demand.
The resulting decline in labor demand further raises unemployment risk, reinforcing
precautionary savings.
We embed the consumption choices of our households—–with heterogeneity over
education type and discount factors—–in a New Keynesian model with search and
matching frictions that closely follows ?, which, in turn, is in spirit of the seminal
work of ??. Aside from the household block of the model, the framework is standard
and follows from the HANK and SAM literature. The model features nominal price
rigidities à la Rotemberg, a monetary authority that sets the nominal interest rate
following a standard Taylor rule that responds to inflation, and a fiscal authority that
taxes labor income and borrows debt from households to fund unemployment insurance
and interest on past debt. As in ?, ?, and ?, households randomly search for jobs and
match with a labor agency that sells labor to intermediate good producers. Complete
details of the model are provided in appendix A.
The general equilibrium structure generates fiscal multipliers through an intertemporal
Keynesian cross mechanism, which becomes particularly pronounced when monetary
policy is passive. Moreover, the search and matching framework allows the employment
rate to respond to policy interventions, allowing us to capture both demand and supply
effects of fiscal policies.
Our approach in this section relies on linearizing the macro dynamics of the model
and employs the Sequence Space Jacobian methods developed by ?. This linearization
imposes certain constraints on our analysis. Notably, we cannot evaluate the effects of
different policies starting from a deep recessionary state, as we do in our main results.32
This limitation prevents us from conducting welfare comparisons between recessionary
periods and the steady state. Additionally, the Keynesian cross mechanism embedded
in the model exhibits uniform behavior regardless of the degree of economic slack—–a
feature that stands in contrast to the state-dependent multipliers we apply in our partial
equilibrium analysis.33
32

One approach to overcome this limitation, which could be used in future work, is described in ?.
We note two additional technical limitations of our general equilibrium implementation. First,
stimulus payments in the model are specified as proportional to permanent income, rather than as
33

35

The consumption response in this general equilibrium model to each of the three
policies is shown in the top row of Figure 5. For each of the three fiscal policies, we
have shown the consumption response under three different monetary policy rules: 1)
an active Taylor rule with a coefficient of 1.5 on inflation; 2) a fixed nominal rate
(simulating an effective lower bound); and 3) a fixed real rate (closest in spirit to our
partial equilibrium analysis).

% consumption deviation

5

5

5

4

4

3

3

3

2

2

2

1

1

1

4

0

Active Taylor Rule
Fixed Nominal Rate
Fixed Real

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(a) stimulus check - IRF

0

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(b) UI extension - IRF

{fig:hank_stimulus_irf}

0

(c) payroll tax cut - IRF

{fig:hank_UI_irf}

1.75

1.75

1.75

1.50

1.50

1.50

1.25

1.25

1.25

1.00

1.00

1.00

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.50

0.50

0.50

0.25

0.25

0.25

0.00

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(d) stimulus check cumulative multiplier

0.00

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(e) UI extension - cumulative
multiplier
{fig:HANK_transfer_multiplier}

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

0.00

{fig:hank_tax_irf}

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
quarter

(f) payroll tax cut cumulative multiplier
{fig:HANK_UI_multiplier}

{fig:HANK_tax_mu

Figure 5 Impulse responses of aggregate consumption to policy shocks as well as
fig:HANK_IRFs
cumulative multipliers as a function of the horizon for the three policies.
Overall, the IRFs from this model are similar to those from the partial equilibrium
analysis, especially under the fixed real-rate rule. Note that the magnitude of the consumption response to the UI extension is lower than in our main analysis—a consequence
of lower long-term unemployment in this HANK exercise of deviating from the steady

means-tested fixed dollar amounts as implemented in practice and in our partial equilibrium framework.
Second, splurge behavior only occurs out of equilibrium.

36

state.34 Furthermore, although we are unable to repeat our welfare analysis under
a recession in this model, the distributional effects of the policies are similar. Most
importantly, the mechanism leading to far greater welfare benefits for the UI extension,
namely that the newly unemployed have high marginal utility, are robust to the supplyside effects of a general equilibrium HANK and SAM model.

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6

Check
Check, HANK model
UI extension
UI extension, HANK model
Tax cut
Tax cut, HANK model

0.4
0.2
1

2

3

4

5

6 7
quarter

8

9

10

11

12

Figure 6 Consumption multiplier as a function of the horizon for the three policies in
the partial equilibrium vs the HANK model

Note: In the partial equilibrium model, policies are implemented during a recession with
aggregate demand effect active.
{fig:HANK_multipl

The bottom row of Figure 5 shows the corresponding cumulative multipliers for each
policy and monetary policy rule. Figure 6 compares these consumption multipliers over
different horizons under a fixed real rate rule to those in our baseline partial equilibrium
model. The multipliers are bigger in the HANK and SAM model. Nevertheless, in
both models, the relative ranking of the consumption multipliers over time horizons are
similar, with the effect of the tax cut substantially smaller than the stimulus check or
34

By contrast, our main analysis considers deviations from a recessionary scenario. Note that the
dynamics of the UI extension IRF are also somewhat faster acting. This is because, under the recession
that we study in the partial equilibrium analysis, the large mass of newly-unemployed households do
not start receiving extended UI for six months.

37

UI extension policies, despite the inclusion of supply-side effects in this HANK model.
However, in contrast to the partial equilibrium model, towards the end of the period
shown the tax cut consumption multiplier is near that of the stimulus check. This is
because the aggregate demand effects in our partial equilibrium model do not continue
beyond the recession, dampening the benefits of the tax cut policy—in which much of
the extra spending occurs after the recession is over—relative to the stimulus check and
extended UI policies.
As discussed in the literature review, ? also compute fiscal multipliers for commonly
implemented stimulus policies in a HANK and SAM framework. A key distinction is
that our model exhibits more spending out of income shocks in the quarters following the
quarter of the shock. As shown in ?, accounting for the path of iMPCs beyond the first
quarter significantly amplifies cumulative fiscal multipliers. By capturing this persistence—consistent with microeconomic evidence—our model produces larger multipliers
for the untargeted stimulus check than those in ?.

6 Conclusion
{sec:conclusion}

For many years leading up to the Great Recession, a widely held view among macroeconomists was that countercyclical policy should be left to central banks, because fiscal
policy responses were unpredictable in their timing, their content, and their effects. Nevertheless, even during this period, fiscal policy responses to recessions were repeatedly
tried, perhaps because the macroeconomists’ advice to fiscal policymakers — “don’t just
do something; stand there”— is not politically tenable.
This paper demonstrates that macroeconomic modeling has finally advanced to the
point where we can make reasonably credible assessments of the effects of alternative
policies of the kinds that have been tried. The key developments have been both the
advent of national registry datasets that can measure crucial microeconomic phenomena
and the creation of tools of heterogeneous agent macroeconomic modeling that can match
those micro facts and glean their macroeconomic implications.
We examine three fiscal policy experiments that have actually been implemented in
the past: an extension of UI benefits, a stimulus check, and a tax cut on labor income.
Our model suggests that the extension of UI benefits is a clear “bang for the buck”
winner. While the stimulus check arrives faster and generates multiplier effects more
quickly, it is less well targeted to high-MPC households than an extension of UI benefits.
By contrast, the welfare gains of extended UI benefits are significantly greater than those
of a stimulus check. The chief drawback of the UI extension is that its size is limited
by the fact that a relatively small share of the population is affected by it. In contrast,
stimulus checks are easily scalable while exhibiting only slightly less recession-period
stimulus (in a typical recession). However, since some of the stimulus checks flow to
well-off consumers, such checks do worse than UI extensions when we evaluate welfare
consequences. Finally, the payroll tax cut is the least effective in terms of both the
multiplier and welfare effect, since it targets only employed consumers and, for a typical

38

recession, more of its payouts are likely to occur after the recessionary period (when
multipliers may exist) has ended.
The tools we are using could be reasonably easily modified to evaluate a number of
other policies. For example, in the COVID-driven recession, not only was the duration of
UI benefits extended, but those benefits were also supplemented by substantial payments
to all UI recipients. We did not calibrate the model to match this particular policy, but
the framework could easily accommodate such an analysis.

39

Appendices

Appendices
A Details of the HANK and SAM Model

{sec:hank_appendix

A.1 Households
The household block follows closely to the main text with a few exceptions. First,
the splurge only occurs out of equilibrium—that is, the steady state of the model is
calculated without the splurge behavior. Second, the level of permanent income of all
newborns is equal to one. Furthermore, all households face the same employment to
unemployment and unemployment to employment probabilities. The probabilities are
calibrated to the transition probabilities of high school graduates from the main text.
Lastly, following the notation of ?, rta will denote the economy wide ex-ante real interest
rate.

A.2 Goods Market
A continuum of monopolistically competitive intermediate goods producers, indexed by
j ∈ [0, 1], produces intermediate goods Yjt , which are sold to a final goods producer at
price Pjt . Each period, these producers fully consume their profits.
A.2.1 Final Goods Producer
A perfectly competitive final goods producer purchases intermediate goods Yjt from
intermediate good producer j at price Pjt and produces the final good Yt using a CES
production function:
ϵp −1
ϵp

Z 1

Yt =

Yjt

0

! ϵp

ϵp −1

dj

,

where ϵp is the elasticity of substitution.
Given Pjt , the price of intermediate good j, the final goods producer maximizes profits
by solving:
ϵ
max Pt
Yjt

Z 1
0

ϵp −1
ϵp

Yjt

!

p
ϵp −1

dj

−

Z 1
0

Pjt Yjt , dj.

The first order condition leads to demand for good j given by
Pjt
Yjt =
Pt


−ϵp

and the price index
Pt =

Z 1
0

1−ϵ
Pjt p dj

40

Yt ,

1
 1−ϵ

p

.

Appendices
A.2.2 Intermediate Goods Producers
Intermediate goods producers produce according to a production function linear in
labor Lt :
Yjt = ZLjt ,
where Z is total factor productivity.
Each intermediate goods producer hires labor Lt from a labor agency at cost ht .
Given this labor cost, each producer sets Pjt to maximize profits while facing price
stickiness à la ?. In HANK models with sticky prices, profits tend to be countercyclical,
and when households have high MPCs, this can generate countercyclical consumption
responses to dividends. To simplify, we assume that intermediate goods producers fully
consume their profits rather than distributing them to households, thereby abstracting
from consumption responses to firm profits. Each producer maximizes profits by solving:

P

Pjt − Pjt−1
Pjt−1

φ
jt Yjt
− ht Ljt −
Jt (Pjt ) = max 
{Pjt }
Pt
2




!2

Yt + Jt+1 (Pjt+1 ) ,


where φ determines the cost of adjusting the price and, hence, the degree of price
stickiness.
The problem can be rewritten as the standard New Keynesian maximization problem:


∞
X



!

Pjt+s
φ
− M Ct+s Yjt+s −
max Et  Mt,t+s 
{Pjt }
Pt+s
2
s=0



!2

Pjt+s
−1
Pjt+s−1

Yt+s  ,

where M Ct = hZt .
Given that all firms face the same adjustment costs, there exists a symmetric equilibrium where all firms choose the same price with Pjt = Pt and Yjt = Yt .
The resulting Phillips Curve is
ϵp M Ct = ϵp − 1 + φ(Πt − 1)Πt − Mt,t+1 φ(Πt+1 − 1)Πt+1

Yt+1
Yt

t
where Πt = PPt+1
.

A.3 Labor market
A risk-neutral labor agency supplies labor Nt to intermediate goods producers at cost
ht by hiring households at wage wt . To hire workers, the agency posts vacancies vt ,
which are filled with probability ϕt . Household job search is random. Following ?, we
assume the labor agency cannot observe individual household productivity. Instead, it
only observes the average productivity of all employed workers, which is normalized to
one.
Labor agency. The labor agency determines how many vacancies to post and how

41

Appendices
much labor to sell by solving the following problem:
(

"

Jt (Nt−1 ) = max (ht − wt )Nt − κvt + Et
Nt ,vt

subject to

Jt+1 (Nt )
1 + rta

#)

,

Nt = (1 − ω)Nt−1 + ϕt vt .

The parameters κ and ω are, respectively, the cost of posting a vacancy, and the job
separation rate.
The resulting job creation curve is:
#

"

κ
κ
.
= (ht − wt ) + (1 − ω)Et
ϕt
(1 + rta )ϕt+1
Matching. The matching process between households and the labor agency follows
a Cobb-Douglas matching function:
mt = χeαt vt1−α ,
where mt is the mass of matches, et is the mass of job searchers, α is the matching
function elasticity, and χ is a matching efficiency parameter.
The vacancy filling probability ϕt and the job finding probability ηt evolve as follows:
ηt = χΘit1−α
ϕt = χΘ−α
t
where Θt = vett is labor market tightness.
Wage Determination. Following ? and ?, we assume the real wage evolves according to the following rule:
wt
log
wss




wt−1
Nt
= ϕw log
+ (1 − ϕw )log
,
wss
Nss








where ϕw dictates the extent of real wage rigidity.

A.4 Fiscal Policy
The government issues long term bonds Bt at price qtb in period t that pays δ s in period
t + s + 1 for s ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}.
The bond price satisfies the no arbitrage condition:
qtb =

b
1 + δEt [qt+1
]
.
a
1 + rt

The government funds its expenditures through debt and taxes, subject to the follow-

42

Appendices
ing budget constraint:
(1 + δqtb )Bt−1 + Gt + St = τt wt Nt + qtb Bt ,
where St are payments for unemployment insurance and other transfers.
For all stimulus policies, except tax cuts, we follow ? and allow the tax rate to adjust
in order to stabilize the debt-to-GDP ratio:
b
τt − τss = ϕB qss

Bt−1 − Bss
Yss

where ϕB governs the speed of adjustment.
For the tax cuts, we assume government expenditures adjust following:
b
Gt − Gss = ϕG qss

Bt−1 − Bss
Yss

where ϕG governs the speed of adjustment of government spending in response to debt.

A.5 Monetary Policy
The central bank follows a standard Taylor rule that responds solely to inflation:
it = r∗ + ϕπ πt ,
where ϕπ is the coefficient on inflation. Inflation is given by πt = Pt /Pt−1 − 1, and r∗ is
the steady state interest rate.

A.6 Equilibrium
An equilibrium in this economy is a sequence of:
– Policy Functions (cit (m))∞
t=0 normalized by permanent income.


a
– Prices rt+1
, it , qtb , wt , ht , πt , τt

∞
t=0

.

– Aggregates (Ct , Yt , Nt , Θt , Bt , At )∞
t=0 .
Such that:
∞
a
– (cit (m))∞
t=0 solves the household’s maximization problem given (wt , ηt , rt , τt )t=0 .

– The final goods producer and intermediate goods producers both maximize their
respective objective functions.
– The nominal interest rate is determined by the central bank’s Taylor rule.
– The tax rate is set according to the fiscal rule, ensuring that the government budget
constraint is satisfied.

43

Appendices
Table 9 Calibration
{table:Calibration}

Description

Parameter

Value

Source/Target

Elasticity of Substitution

ϵp

6

Standard

Price Adjustment Costs

φ

96.9

??

Vacancy Cost

κ

0.056

κ
= 0.071
wϕ

Job Separation Rate

ω

0.092

Match π(eu) for Highschool group

Matching Elasticity

α

0.65

??

Job Finding Probability

ηss

0.67

π(ue) in section 3.3.1

Vacancy Filling Rate

ϕss

0.71

den Haan et al. (?)

Real Wage Rigidity parameter

ϕw

0.837

Gornemann et al. (?)

Government Spending

G

0.38

Gov. budget constraint

Decay rate of Gov. Coupons

δ

0.95

5 Year Maturity of Debt

Response of Tax Rate to Debt

ϕB

0.015

Auclert et al. (?)

Taylor Rule Inflation Coefficient

ϕπ

1.5

Standard

– The value of assets is equal to the value of government bonds:
At = qtb Bt .
– The goods market clears35 :

Ct = wt Nt + Gt ,

where Ct ≡ 0 cit di.
R1

– The labor demand of intermediate goods producers equals labor supply of labor
agency:
Lt = Nt .

35

Note if profits were not held by firms then the goods market condition would be Ct + Gt =

2

2
t
t
Yt −κvt − φ2 PPt−1
− 1 Yt . In particular, since firm profits are Dt = Yt −wt Nt −κvt − φ2 PPt−1
− 1 Yt ,

2
t
then the goods market condition would become Ct + Gt = wt Nt + Dt = Yt − κvt − φ2 PPt−1
− 1 Yt .

44

A.7 Calibration of Non-Household Blocks
The elasticity of substitution is set to 6, and the price adjustment cost parameter is
set to 96.9 as in ??. The vacancy cost is set to 7% of the real wage as in ?.36 The
matching elasticity is 0.65 following ??. The job separation rate is set to 0.092. As in
section 3.3.1, we set the job finding probability in the steady state for the unemployed
ηss to 0.67. Along with the job separation rate, this gives a probability of transitioning
from employment to unemployment within a quarter of 3.1 percent which is the value we
use for the Highschool group in section 3.3.1. The quarterly vacancy filling rate is 0.71
as in ? (and together with our other choices, this pins down the matching efficiency χ).
The degree of wage rigidity ϕw is set to 0.837 following ?. The tax rate is set to 0.3 and
government spending is set to clear the government budget constraint. The parameters
that dictate the speed of fiscal adjustment, ϕB and ϕG , are set to 0.015, the lower bound
of the estimates in ?.37 Furthermore, the decay rate of government coupons is set to
δ = 0.95 to match a maturity of 5 years.38 Finally, the Taylor rule coefficient on inflation
is set to the standard value of ϕπ = 1.5.

36

The range of plausible values lie between 4% and 14% ?
The speed of adjustment parameter is set to the lower bound to ensure that the policies evaluated
in the HANK and SAM model are almost entirely deficit financed.
(1+r)4
38
The duration of bonds in the model is (1+r)
4 −δ
37

45

